node:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
node:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering.
node:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
node:Brain imaging of the self--conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues.
node:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
node:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal.
node:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder.
node:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
node:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
node:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia.
node:Functional cerebral activity in a state of rest: connectivity networks.
node:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
node:Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression.
node:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients.
node:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
node:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging.
node:Changes of brain structure and function in ADHD children.
node:Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
node:Real versus imagined locomotion: a [18F]-FDG PET-fMRI comparison.
node:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data.
node:Mapping the altered patterns of cerebellar resting-state function in longitudinal amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients.
node:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
node:Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.
node:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression.
node:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity.
node:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus.
node:Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging resting-state connectivity in periaqueductal gray networks in migraine.
node:Imaging genomics.
node:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks.
node:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
node:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex.
node:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states.
node:Evaluation of the post-effect of acupuncture at Sanyinjiao (SP 6) under sleep deprivation by resting-state amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation: a fMRI study.
node:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness.
node:Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes.
node:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data.
node:Functional network organization of the human brain.
node:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network.
node:Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:How not to study spontaneous activity.
node:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
node:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity.
node:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis.
node:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
node:Restricted canonical correlation analysis in functional MRI-validation and a novel thresholding technique.
node:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study.
node:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning.
node:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity.
node:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model.
node:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain.
node:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
node:Group ICA of resting-state data: a comparison.
node:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence.
node:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
node:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks.
node:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
node:Altered resting-state amygdala functional connectivity in men with posttraumatic stress disorder.
node:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI.
node:Structural and functional cerebral impairments in cirrhotic patients with a history of overt hepatic encephalopathy.
node:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance.
node:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.
node:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions.
node:Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
node:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
node:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
node:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus.
node:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain.
node:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
node:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life.
node:A default mode of brain function.
node:Exploratory structural equation modeling of resting-state fMRI: applicability of group models to individual subjects.
node:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data.
node:Changes in resting state effective connectivity in the motor network following rehabilitation of upper extremity poststroke paresis.
node:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states.
node:Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age.
node:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism.
node:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp.
node:The future of FMRI connectivity.
node:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
node:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
node:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
node:Diffusion tensor imaging and resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging on young patients with major depressive disorder.
node:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
node:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Increased sleep pressure reduces resting state functional connectivity.
node:A comparison of five fMRI protocols for mapping speech comprehension systems.
node:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study.
node:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
node:Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
node:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
node:Default network and intelligence difference.
node:Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI.
node:Fiber-centered Granger causality analysis.
node:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity.
node:Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging.
node:A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control.
node:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks.
node:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
node:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
node:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter.
node:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
node:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability.
node:Genetic variation in serotonin transporter alters resting brain function in healthy individuals.
node:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
node:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
node:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
node:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
node:A cerebrovascular response model for functional neuroimaging including dynamic cerebral autoregulation.
node:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression.
node:Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
node:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum.
node:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
node:Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
node:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
node:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.
node:Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
node:Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data.
node:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI.
node:Schizophrenic patients and their unaffected siblings share increased resting-state connectivity in the task-negative network but not Its anticorrelated task-positive network.
node:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity.
node:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study.
node:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
node:Slow brain oscillations of sleep, resting state, and vigilance.
node:Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression.
node:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
node:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
node:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
node:A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG.
node:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory.
node:Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus.
node:Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:First-episode psychosis is characterized by failure of deactivation but not by hypo- or hyperfrontality.
node:Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
node:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
node:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia.
node:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression.
node:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
node:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
node:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis.
node:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest.
node:Nicotine effects on default mode network during resting state.
node:Central modulating mechanism of ST36 (Zusanlii) acupuncturing on amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in resting-state.
node:Functional connectivity of the superior human temporal sulcus in the brain resting state at 3T.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
node:Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
node:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
node:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis.
node:Reading networks at rest.
node:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy.
node:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma.
node:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia.
node:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
node:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
node:Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
node:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
node:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
node:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
node:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets.
node:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI.
node:Contour-based registration technique to differentiate between task-activated and head motion-induced signal variations in fMRI.
node:Behavioral interpretations of intrinsic connectivity networks.
node:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
node:An alternative approach towards assessing and accounting for individual motion in fMRI timeseries.
node:Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS.
node:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula.
node:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI.
node:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain.
node:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia.
node:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study.
node:Lesion evidence for the critical role of the intraparietal sulcus in spatial attention.
node:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
node:Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:A generalized estimating equations approach for resting-state functional MRI group analysis.
node:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn.
node:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
node:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI.
node:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
node:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study.
node:Resting state networks in human cervical spinal cord observed with fMRI.
node:Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging of resting-state cerebral blood flow in preclinical Huntington's disease.
node:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
node:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity.
node:Modulation of large-scale brain networks by transcranial direct current stimulation evidenced by resting-state functional MRI.
node:Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity.
node:Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
node:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies.
node:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
node:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
node:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
node:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study.
node:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children.
node:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity.
node:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model.
node:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
node:Resisting emotional interference: brain regions facilitating working memory performance during negative distraction.
node:Comparing dynamic causal models.
node:Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder.
node:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
node:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
node:Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state.
node:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.
node:Default network connectivity during a working memory task.
node:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus.
node:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
node:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI.
node:Comparison of functional connectivity in default mode and sensorimotor networks at 3 and 7T.
node:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
node:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A.
node:Functional connectivity estimation in fMRI data: influence of preprocessing and time course selection.
node:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
node:Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
node:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
node:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury.
node:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders.
node:Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
node:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI.
node:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
node:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects.
node:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
node:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
node:Functional classification of schizophrenia using feed forward neural networks.
node:Effect of memantine on resting state default mode network activity in Alzheimer's disease.
node:SSRI administration reduces resting state functional connectivity in dorso-medial prefrontal cortex.
node:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
node:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
node:Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
node:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
node:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease.
node:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
node:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia.
node:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease.
node:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
node:Functional connectivity during resting-state functional MR imaging: Study of the correspondence between independent component analysis and region-of-interest-based methods.
node:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations.
node:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
node:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design.
node:Toward discovery science of human brain function.
node:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans.
node:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI.
node:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
node:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
node:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
node:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
node:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury.
node:Gender-related differences in functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis.
node:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty.
node:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
node:Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks.
node:Restoration of mammillothalamic functional connectivity through thiamine replacement therapy in Wernicke's encephalopathy.
node:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
node:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures.
node:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.
node:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
node:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex.
node:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain.
node:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy.
node:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia.
node:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
node:Cluster analysis detection of functional MRI activity in temporal lobe epilepsy.
node:Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
node:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury.
node:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
node:Detecting functional connectivity in fMRI using PCA and regression analysis.
node:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity.
node:Modulation of CNS pain circuitry by intravenous and sublingual doses of buprenorphine.
node:Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
node:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy.
node:Neural origin of spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations in rats under burst-suppression anesthesia condition.
node:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
node:The dynamical balance of the brain at rest.
node:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism.
node:Neuroimaging technique: a diagnostic tool to detect altered states of consciousness.
node:Preoperative sensorimotor mapping in brain tumor patients using spontaneous fluctuations in neuronal activity imaged with functional magnetic resonance imaging: initial experience.
node:Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.
node:Cognitive development of normal school age children: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state.
node:Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
node:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
node:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
node:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications.
node:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
node:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
node:Emerging imaging tools for use with traumatic brain injury research.
node:Differential temporo-parietal cortical networks that support relational and item-based recency judgments.
node:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
node:Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis.
node:Effects of training of processing speed on neural systems.
node:Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
node:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
node:Atypical default network connectivity in youth with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
node:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
node:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.
node:Brain functional connectivity of functional magnetic resonance imaging of patients with early-onset schizophrenia.
node:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
node:Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies.
node:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
node:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
node:Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
node:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit.
node:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
node:Abnormal T2 relaxation time in the cerebellar vermis of adults sexually abused in childhood: potential role of the vermis in stress-enhanced risk for drug abuse.
node:Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
node:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state.
node:The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.
node:Conditional mutual information maps as descriptors of net connectivity levels in the brain.
node:The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
node:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy.
node:Developmental alterations of frontal-striatal-thalamic connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
node:Default mode of brain activity demonstrated by positron emission tomography imaging in awake monkeys: higher rest-related than working memory-related activity in medial cortical areas.
node:The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state FMRI.
node:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead.
node:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression.
node:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
node:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
node:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
node:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
node:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
node:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
node:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
node:Intrinsically organized network for word processing during the resting state.
node:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
node:Altered regional synchronization in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
node:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
node:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance.
node:Neural Encoding of Objects Relevant for Navigation and Resting State Correlations with Navigational Ability.
node:Causes and consequences of cerebral small vessel disease. The RUN DMC study: a prospective cohort study. Study rationale and protocol.
node:Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function.
node:Lifelong bilingualism maintains white matter integrity in older adults.
node:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
node:Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
node:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex.
node:Disrupted functional connectivity of the pain network in fibromyalgia.
node:The resting human brain and motor learning.
node:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
node:Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
node:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
node:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks.
node:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
node:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
node:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
node:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state.
node:Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
node:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
node:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
node:I remember you: A role for memory in social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their interaction.
node:Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
node:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state.
node:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression.
node:Spontaneous fMRI activity during resting wakefulness and sleep.
node:Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data.
node:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
node:Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations.
node:Brain activation in complex partial seizures during switching from a the goal-directed task to a resting state: comparison of fMRI maps to the default mode network.
node:Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
node:Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach.
node:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain.
node:Non-invasive electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study.
node:Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
node:On consciousness, resting state fMRI, and neurodynamics.
node:Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression.
node:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis.
node:BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
node:MATLAB toolbox for functional connectivity.
node:Energy-based stochastic control of neural mass models suggests time-varying effective connectivity in the resting state.
node:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.
node:The default mode network: cognitive role and pathological disturbances.
node:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
node:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
node:Decreased functional brain connectivity in individuals with early-treated phenylketonuria: evidence from resting state fMRI.
node:Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
node:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation.
node:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network.
node:Effects of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on human regional cerebral blood flow.
node:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy.
node:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation.
node:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
node:Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
node:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study.
node:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing.
node:Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
node:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI.
node:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces.
node:Higher-order contrast functions improve performance of independent component analysis of fMRI data.
node:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
node:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome.
node:Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
node:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
node:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study.
node:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy.
node:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS.
node:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation.
node:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers.
node:Alteration of resting brain function by genetic variation in angiotensin converting enzyme in amnestic-type mild cognitive impairment of Chinese Han.
node:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.
node:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation.
node:Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
node:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
node:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study.
node:Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
node:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men.
node:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
node:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
node:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Functionally specific changes in resting-state sensorimotor networks after motor learning.
node:Fine-scale functional connectivity in somatosensory cortex revealed by high-resolution fMRI.
node:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study.
node:Recent advances in structural and functional brain imaging studies of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
node:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation.
node:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
node:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation.
node:The role of nonlinearity in computing graph-theoretical properties of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging brain networks.
node:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
node:A brain functional connectivity analysis based on independent component analysis.
node:Oxidative glucose metabolism in rat brain during single forepaw stimulation: a spatially localized 1H[13C] nuclear magnetic resonance study.
node:Predicting decisions in human social interactions using real-time fMRI and pattern classification.
node:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest.
node:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder.
node:Functional connectivity in late-life depression using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network.
node:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection.
node:The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions.
node:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI.
node:Application of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation to the temporal lobe epilepsy with bilateral hippocampal sclerosis: an fMRI study.
node:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
node:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
node:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI.
node:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain.
node:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex.
node:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain.
node:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
node:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy.
node:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant.
node:Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
node:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia.
node:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'.
node:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease.
node:A comparison of signal instability in 2D and 3D EPI resting-state fMRI.
node:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex.
node:Topographic maps of multisensory attention.
node:To act or not to act. Neural correlates of executive control of learned motor behavior.
node:Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
node:Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
node:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study.
node:Spatial nonuniformity of the resting CBF and BOLD responses to sevoflurane: in vivo study of normal human subjects with magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots.
node:Neuroimaging in cannabis use: a systematic review of the literature.
node:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
node:Neurophysiology of functional imaging.
node:Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study.
node:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI.
node:Neuroimaging after coma.
node:Functional connectivity variations in mild cognitive impairment: associations with cognitive function.
node:Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
node:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
node:Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
node:Brain functions in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder combined and inattentive subtypes: A resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches.
node:Analysis of EEG-fMRI data in focal epilepsy based on automated spike classification and Signal Space Projection.
node:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network.
node:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
node:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain.
node:Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy.
node:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
node:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
node:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts.
node:Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
node:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
node:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
node:Undirected thought: Neural determinants and correlates.
node:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
node:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
node:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
node:Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
node:Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy.
node:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study.
node:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T.
node:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity.
node:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
node:Differential age effects on cerebral blood flow and BOLD response to encoding: associations with cognition and stroke risk.
node:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability.
node:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology.
node:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy.
node:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area.
node:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
node:Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
node:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins.
node:Neuronal networks in children with continuous spikes and waves during slow sleep.
node:A conditional Granger causality model approach for group analysis in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
node:Potential pitfall of reduced cerebral perfusion in clinical resting state functional MR imaging.
node:Reduced precuneus deactivation during object naming in patients with mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
node:Fractionating the default mode network: distinct contributions of the ventral and dorsal posterior cingulate cortex to cognitive control.
node:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
node:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity.
node:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
node:Cerebral blood flow and BOLD responses to a memory encoding task: a comparison between healthy young and elderly adults.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
node:Functional connectivity between brain regions involved in learning words of a new language.
node:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies.
node:BOLD and perfusion changes during epileptic generalised spike wave activity.
node:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal.
node:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis.
node:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.
node:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents.
node:Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
node:Aberrant default mode network in subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment using resting-state functional MRI.
node:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
node:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
node:Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache.
node:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
node:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty.
node:Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
node:Spatially extended FMRI signal response to stimulus in non-functionally relevant regions of the human brain: preliminary results.
node:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders.
node:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
node:Functional network connectivity during rest and task: Comparison of healthy controls and schizophrenic patients.
node:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study.
node:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.
node:Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
node:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography.
node:Increased cortical BOLD signal anticipates generalized spike and wave discharges in adolescents and adults with idiopathic generalized epilepsies.
node:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness.
node:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
node:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia.
node:Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
node:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
node:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.
node:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
node:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke.
node:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation.
node:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis.
node:Disease Tracking Markers for Alzheimer's Disease at the Prodromal (MCI) Stage.
node:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study.
node:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.
node:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
node:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
node:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
node:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia.
node:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.
node:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T.
node:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach.
node:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
node:Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
node:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination.
node:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks.
node:Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS).
node:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity.
node:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study.
node:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children.
node:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
node:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
node:Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
node:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy.
node:Fundamentals of electroencefalography, magnetoencefalography, and functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder.
node:A historical perspective on the evolution of resting-state functional connectivity with MRI.
node:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain.
node:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI.
node:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo.
node:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
node:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence.
node:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke.
node:Using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging to differentiate between healthy aging subjects, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer's patients.
node:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
node:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain.
node:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder.
node:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
node:Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
node:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
node:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network.
node:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study.
node:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network.
node:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children.
node:Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
node:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition.
node:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
node:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
node:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
node:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
node:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
node:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
node:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation.
node:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
node:Sources of systematic bias in hypercapnia-calibrated functional MRI estimation of oxygen metabolism.
node:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure.
node:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.
node:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
node:Hypnotic modulation of resting state fMRI default mode and extrinsic network connectivity.
node:Attenuated brain response to auditory word stimulation with sevoflurane: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in humans.
node:Methods of the pharmacological imaging of the cannabinoid system (PhICS) study: towards understanding the role of the brain endocannabinoid system in human cognition.
node:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
node:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
node:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans.
node:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis.
node:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI.
node:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization.
node:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children.
node:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder.
node:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
node:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
node:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain.
node:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
node:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease.
node:A multiscale analysis of the temporal characteristics of resting-state fMRI data.
node:Network discovery with DCM.
node:Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
node:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network.
node:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease.
node:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
node:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres.
node:Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
node:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions.
node:A cross-modal system linking primary auditory and visual cortices: evidence from intrinsic fMRI connectivity analysis.
node:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
node:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states.
node:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study.
node:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
node:Partitioning networks into clusters and residuals with average association.
node:Brain networks subserving the extraction of sentence information and its encoding to memory.
node:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.
node:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI.
node:Reduced negative BOLD responses in the default-mode network and increased self-focus in depression.
node:Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
node:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks.
node:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.
node:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
node:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
node:Transient alcohol craving suppression by rTMS of dorsal anterior cingulate: an fMRI and LORETA EEG study.
node:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders.
node:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment.
node:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data.
node:Sex-related differences in amygdala functional connectivity during resting conditions.
node:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
node:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study.
node:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder.
node:Decreased regional homogeneity in major depression as revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Increased cortico-subcortical functional connectivity in schizophrenia.
node:Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks.
node:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study.
node:Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis.
node:The selectivity and functional connectivity of the anterior temporal lobes.
node:Functional connectivity in blood oxygenation level-dependent and cerebral blood volume-weighted resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging in the rat brain.
node:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
node:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression.
node:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
node:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training.
node:Motor pathway injury in patients with periventricular leucomalacia and spastic diplegia.
node:Endogenous cortisol is associated with functional connectivity between the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex.
node:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study.
node:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
node:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders.
node:Long-term vascular access ports as a means of sedative administration in a rodent fMRI survival model.
node:Short-term meditation increases network efficiency of the anterior cingulate cortex.
node:Recency effects in the inferior parietal lobe during verbal recognition memory.
node:Functional brain imaging in 14 patients with dissociative amnesia reveals right inferolateral prefrontal hypometabolism.
node:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study.
node:Resting state functional MRI in Alzheimer's disease.
node:Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
node:Functional anatomy of cortical areas characterized by Von Economo neurons.
node:Multimodal neuroimaging in patients with disorders of consciousness showing "functional hemispherectomy".
node:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Correlations in spontaneous activity and gray matter density between left and right sensoritmotor areas of pianists.
node:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses.
node:Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis.
node:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.
node:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
node:Reaching across the abyss: recent advances in functional magnetic resonance imaging and their potential relevance to disorders of consciousness.
node:Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
node:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep.
node:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
node:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
node:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method.
node:Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
node:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
node:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study.
node:Multi-subject dictionary learning to segment an atlas of brain spontaneous activity.
node:Experience-dependent alterations in conscious resting state activity following perceptuomotor learning.
node:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
node:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults.
node:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study.
node:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
node:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics.
node:Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data.
node:Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
node:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load.
node:MRI magnetic field stimulates rotational sensors of the brain.
node:Joint Modeling of Anatomical and Functional Connectivity for Population Studies.
node:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
node:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
node:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation.
node:Assessing brain connectivity at rest is clinically relevant in early multiple sclerosis.
node:Utility of functional MRI in pediatric neurology.
node:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment.
node:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
node:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia.
node:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI.
node:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI.
node:Increased resting-state perfusion after repeated encoding is related to later retrieval of declarative associative memories.
node:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
node:Emotional faces and the default mode network.
node:Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
node:Hypnotic induction decreases anterior default mode activity.
node:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network.
node:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults.
node:Isolating the sources of widespread physiological fluctuations in functional near-infrared spectroscopy signals.
node:A combined neuropsychological and brain imaging study of obstructive sleep apnea.
node:Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
node:Genetic modulation of neural response during working memory in healthy individuals: interaction of glucocorticoid receptor and dopaminergic genes.
node:The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI.
node:Interpreting functional imaging studies in terms of neurotransmitter cycling.
node:Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.
node:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls.
node:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses.
node:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing.
node:Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
node:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study.
node:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
node:Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
node:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
node:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement.
node:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia.
node:An energy budget for the olfactory glomerulus.
node:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias.
node:Distributed changes in default-mode resting-state connectivity in multiple sclerosis.
node:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
node:Resting functional connectivity in patients with brain tumors in eloquent areas.
node:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study.
node:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
node:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression.
node:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
node:Prefrontal-related functional connectivities within the default network are modulated by COMT val158met in healthy young adults.
node:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain.
node:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network.
node:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
node:Dynamic changes in brain activations and functional connectivity during affectively different tactile stimuli.
node:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
node:Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.
node:Chronic and treatment-resistant depression: a study using arterial spin labeling perfusion MRI at 3Tesla.
node:Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
node:Predicting BOLD signal changes as a function of blood volume fraction and resolution.
node:Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
node:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
node:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
node:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
node:Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state.
node:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction.
node:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
node:Differential relationships between transcallosal structural and functional connectivity in young and older adults.
node:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
node:A functional magnetic resonance imaging study on the neural mechanisms of hyperalgesic nocebo effect.
node:Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
node:Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion.
node:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
node:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
node:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
node:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations.
node:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance.
node:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI.
node:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure.
node:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state.
node:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets.
node:Altered functional connectivity between the insula and the cingulate cortex in patients with Temporomandibular Disorder: A pilot study.
node:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
node:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics.
node:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
node:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
node:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task.
node:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease.
node:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain.
node:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices.
node:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
node:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance.
node:Resting state fMRI-guided fiber clustering.
node:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
node:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study.
node:Simulation of the effects of global normalization procedures in functional MRI.
node:Depression recognition using resting-state and event-related fMRI signals.
node:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
node:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.
node:Neurohemodynamic correlates of 'OM' chanting: A pilot functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery.
node:Depression, rumination and the default network.
node:Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI.
node:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal.
node:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience.
node:Neuroimaging of cortical development and brain connectivity in human newborns and animal models.
node:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy.
node:Resting oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex.
node:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex.
node:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis.
node:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
node:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations.
node:Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
node:Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
node:Investigation of high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging by means of surface and array radiofrequency coils at 7 T.
node:Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
node:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
node:Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers.
node:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
node:Social fearfulness in the human brain.
node:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.
node:Three dimensional echo-planar imaging at 7 Tesla.
node:Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term.
node:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
node:Prefrontal transcranial direct current stimulation changes connectivity of resting-state networks during fMRI.
node:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents.
node:Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation.
node:A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
node:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
node:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI.
node:Components of variance in a multicentre functional MRI study and implications for calculation of statistical power.
node:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study.
node:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.
node:Increased default mode network connectivity associated with meditation.
node:Directional connectivity of resting state human fMRI data using cascaded ICA-PDC analysis.
node:FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network.
node:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity.
node:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain.
node:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance.
node:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach.
node:Frontal-to-parietal top-down causal streams along the dorsal attention network exclusively mediate voluntary orienting of attention.
node:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain.
node:The effect of model order selection in group PICA.
node:Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication.
node:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts.
node:Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
node:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
node:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
node:Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
node:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.
node:Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns.
node:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
node:Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study.
node:Increasing measurement accuracy of age-related BOLD signal change: minimizing vascular contributions by resting-state-fluctuation-of-amplitude scaling.
node:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity.
node:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
node:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
node:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks.
node:Spectral characteristics of resting state networks.
node:Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
node:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression.
node:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
node:Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.
node:GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
node:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
node:Exploiting the potential of three dimensional spatial wavelet analysis to explore nesting of temporal oscillations and spatial variance in simultaneous EEG-fMRI data.
node:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy.
node:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis.
node:Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate aftermath of acute psychological stress.
node:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia.
node:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
node:Pseudo-continuous transfer insensitive labeling technique.
node:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment.
node:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
node:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
node:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
node:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
node:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm.
node:Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal frontoparietal and basal ganglia-cortical networks.
node:Psychogenic amnesia and self-identity: a multimodal functional investigation.
node:Decreased intrinsic brain connectivity is associated with reduced clinical pain in fibromyalgia.
node:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling.
node:Changes occur in resting state network of motor system during 4 weeks of motor skill learning.
node:Structural and functional neuroimaging studies of the suicidal brain.
node:Defining neurocognitive networks in the BOLD new world of computed connectivity.
node:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
node:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain.
node:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity.
node:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
node:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
node:Dissociating mental states related to doing nothing by means of fMRI pattern classification.
node:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence.
node:Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
node:Reduced connectivity of the auditory cortex in patients with auditory hallucinations: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI.
node:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
node:Interregional brain interactions in children with unilateral hearing loss.
node:Functional disconnection and compensation in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from DLPFC connectivity using resting-state fMRI.
node:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine.
node:Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
node:Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
node:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients.
node:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study.
node:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity.
node:Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
node:Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
node:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
node:Differential activity of subgenual cingulate and brainstem in panic disorder and PTSD.
node:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
node:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI.
node:Differential involvement of striato- and cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathways in tremor- and akinetic/rigid-predominant Parkinson's disease.
node:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations.
node:Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity.
node:From EEG to BOLD: brain mapping and estimating transfer functions in simultaneous EEG-fMRI acquisitions.
node:The role of impaired neuronal communication in neurological disorders.
node:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
node:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
node:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies.
node:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
node:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
node:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
node:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
node:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder.
node:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
node:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury.
node:Update on the magnetic resonance imaging core of the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative.
node:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients.
node:Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
node:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
node:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain.
node:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
node:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity.
node:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.
node:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest.
node:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI.
node:Genetic control over the resting brain.
node:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients.
node:Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
node:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
node:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men.
node:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
node:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis.
node:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain.
node:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state.
node:Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
node:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects.
node:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults.
node:Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
node:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
node:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI.
node:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
node:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
node:Modulation of cerebellar excitability by polarity-specific noninvasive direct current stimulation.
node:Controlling the false positive rate in fuzzy clustering using randomization: application to fMRI activation detection.
node:Resting state fMRI: A personal history.
node:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
node:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts.
node:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study.
node:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks.
node:Investigation of acupoint specificity by multivariate granger causality analysis from functional MRI data.
node:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI.
node:Functional connectivity of dissociation in patients with psychogenic non-epileptic seizures.
node:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism.
node:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
node:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders.
node:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network.
node:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures.
node:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors.
node:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest.
node:A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
node:Distributed and antagonistic contributions of ongoing activity fluctuations to auditory stimulus detection.
node:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems.
node:Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients.
node:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state.
node:Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
node:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations.
node:Anesthetic mechanisms revealed by functional brain imaging.
node:Abnormal amygdala connectivity in patients with primary insomnia: Evidence from resting state fMRI.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems.
node:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
node:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks.
node:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure.
node:Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
node:Regional grey matter loss and brain disconnection across Alzheimer disease evolution.
node:Correction of low-frequency physiological noise from the resting state BOLD fMRI--Effect on ICA default mode analysis at 1.5 T.
node:An improved method for mapping cerebrovascular reserve using concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy with Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe).
node:Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
node:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects.
node:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia.
node:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks.
node:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
node:Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
node:fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep.
node:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
node:Distinct resting-state brain activities in heroin-dependent individuals.
node:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions.
node:Functional neuroanatomy of the hypnotic state.
node:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
node:Images-based suppression of unwanted global signals in resting-state functional connectivity studies.
node:Localization of brain activity by temporal anti-correlation with the posterior cingulate cortex.
node:Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model
node:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test.
node:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration.
node:Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
node:Comparison of functional MR-venography and EPI-BOLD fMRI at 1.5 T.
node:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
node:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures.
node:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
node:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
node:Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
node:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
node:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
node:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
node:Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
node:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
node:Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
node:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study.
node:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
node:Functional connectivity analysis of super acute cerebral ischemia in rats: a resting-state functional MRI empirical study.
node:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.
node:Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
node:Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
node:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks.
node:Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
node:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
node:Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex.
node:Increased regional homogeneity of blood oxygen level-dependent signals in occipital cortex of early blind individuals.
node:Decreased brain activation during a working memory task at rested baseline is associated with vulnerability to sleep deprivation.
node:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
node:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI.
node:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks.
node:Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination.
node:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
node:Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function.
node:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
node:Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders.
node:Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T.
node:Unbiased group-wise image registration: applications in brain fiber tract atlas construction and functional connectivity analysis.
node:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection.
node:True associations between resting fMRI time series based on innovations.
node:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
node:Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study.
node:Quantitative BOLD: mapping of human cerebral deoxygenated blood volume and oxygen extraction fraction: default state.
node:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T.
node:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
node:fMRI as a Measure of Cognition Related Brain Circuitry in Schizophrenia.
node:Structural and functional MRI in mild cognitive impairment.
node:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:The effect of model order selection in group PICA./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture./Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network./Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data.
edge:The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Non-invasive electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study./Changes in resting state effective connectivity in the motor network following rehabilitation of upper extremity poststroke paresis.
edge:Non-invasive electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Non-invasive electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Non-invasive electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study./Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder.
edge:Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression./Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Distributed and antagonistic contributions of ongoing activity fluctuations to auditory stimulus detection.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:Topographic maps of multisensory attention./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Topographic maps of multisensory attention.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Topographic maps of multisensory attention.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.
edge:Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./A default mode of brain function.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./Resisting emotional interference: brain regions facilitating working memory performance during negative distraction.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network.
edge:When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance./Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine.
edge:Psychogenic amnesia and self-identity: a multimodal functional investigation./Functional brain imaging in 14 patients with dissociative amnesia reveals right inferolateral prefrontal hypometabolism.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients./White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Genetic variation in serotonin transporter alters resting brain function in healthy individuals.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study./Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Mapping the altered patterns of cerebellar resting-state function in longitudinal amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Mapping the altered patterns of cerebellar resting-state function in longitudinal amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Mapping the altered patterns of cerebellar resting-state function in longitudinal amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Mapping the altered patterns of cerebellar resting-state function in longitudinal amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Mapping the altered patterns of cerebellar resting-state function in longitudinal amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study.
edge:Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment./Aberrant default mode network in subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment using resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Network discovery with DCM.
edge:Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain./Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.
edge:The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain./Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
edge:Differential age effects on cerebral blood flow and BOLD response to encoding: associations with cognition and stroke risk./Cerebral blood flow and BOLD responses to a memory encoding task: a comparison between healthy young and elderly adults.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks.
edge:Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort./Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
edge:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia./Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T./The effect of model order selection in group PICA.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Neural origin of spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations in rats under burst-suppression anesthesia condition.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI.
edge:Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain./Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Detecting functional connectivity in fMRI using PCA and regression analysis.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI./Images-based suppression of unwanted global signals in resting-state functional connectivity studies.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing.
edge:A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI./ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks.
edge:Increased cortical BOLD signal anticipates generalized spike and wave discharges in adolescents and adults with idiopathic generalized epilepsies./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased cortical BOLD signal anticipates generalized spike and wave discharges in adolescents and adults with idiopathic generalized epilepsies./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:Depression, rumination and the default network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Depression, rumination and the default network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Depression, rumination and the default network./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./How not to study spontaneous activity.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./How not to study spontaneous activity.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state./Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./Investigation of high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging by means of surface and array radiofrequency coils at 7 T.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement.
edge:Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:A comparison of five fMRI protocols for mapping speech comprehension systems./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:A comparison of five fMRI protocols for mapping speech comprehension systems./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Correction of low-frequency physiological noise from the resting state BOLD fMRI--Effect on ICA default mode analysis at 1.5 T.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity./Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Toward discovery science of human brain function./Functional cerebral activity in a state of rest: connectivity networks.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Increasing measurement accuracy of age-related BOLD signal change: minimizing vascular contributions by resting-state-fluctuation-of-amplitude scaling.
edge:Resting state fMRI: A personal history./Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/A default mode of brain function.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network/Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity.
edge:Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma./Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.
edge:Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Default network connectivity during a working memory task./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./A cross-modal system linking primary auditory and visual cortices: evidence from intrinsic fMRI connectivity analysis.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Reaching across the abyss: recent advances in functional magnetic resonance imaging and their potential relevance to disorders of consciousness.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Defining neurocognitive networks in the BOLD new world of computed connectivity.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach.
edge:Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./A default mode of brain function.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI.
edge:Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Comparison of functional connectivity in default mode and sensorimotor networks at 3 and 7T.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography.
edge:Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Recency effects in the inferior parietal lobe during verbal recognition memory./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Recency effects in the inferior parietal lobe during verbal recognition memory./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Recency effects in the inferior parietal lobe during verbal recognition memory./Differential temporo-parietal cortical networks that support relational and item-based recency judgments.
edge:Recency effects in the inferior parietal lobe during verbal recognition memory./Multimodal neuroimaging in patients with disorders of consciousness showing "functional hemispherectomy".
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease./Recency effects in the inferior parietal lobe during verbal recognition memory.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Motor pathway injury in patients with periventricular leucomalacia and spastic diplegia.
edge:Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia./Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal frontoparietal and basal ganglia-cortical networks.
edge:Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity./Network discovery with DCM.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks.
edge:Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review./Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
edge:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./MATLAB toolbox for functional connectivity.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia./A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy./Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
edge:Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./A historical perspective on the evolution of resting-state functional connectivity with MRI.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./The dynamical balance of the brain at rest.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Prefrontal transcranial direct current stimulation changes connectivity of resting-state networks during fMRI.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Non-invasive electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Modulation of large-scale brain networks by transcranial direct current stimulation evidenced by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model./Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex./Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state.
edge:Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations./Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain./Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations.
edge:Functional anatomy of cortical areas characterized by Von Economo neurons./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional anatomy of cortical areas characterized by Von Economo neurons./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Functional anatomy of cortical areas characterized by Von Economo neurons./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Functional anatomy of cortical areas characterized by Von Economo neurons./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Atypical default network connectivity in youth with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Depression, rumination and the default network.
edge:Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia./Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression./Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations./Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function./Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression.
edge:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI./Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI.
edge:Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI./A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Dynamic changes in brain activations and functional connectivity during affectively different tactile stimuli.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism./Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Detecting functional connectivity in fMRI using PCA and regression analysis.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions./Fine-scale functional connectivity in somatosensory cortex revealed by high-resolution fMRI.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies.
edge:Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging./Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity.
edge:Structural and functional cerebral impairments in cirrhotic patients with a history of overt hepatic encephalopathy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Structural and functional cerebral impairments in cirrhotic patients with a history of overt hepatic encephalopathy./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Structural and functional cerebral impairments in cirrhotic patients with a history of overt hepatic encephalopathy./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Structural and functional cerebral impairments in cirrhotic patients with a history of overt hepatic encephalopathy./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Structural and functional cerebral impairments in cirrhotic patients with a history of overt hepatic encephalopathy./Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts.
edge:A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies./Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy./Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Predicting BOLD signal changes as a function of blood volume fraction and resolution.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder./Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Detecting functional connectivity in fMRI using PCA and regression analysis.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.
edge:Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Decreased functional brain connectivity in individuals with early-treated phenylketonuria: evidence from resting state fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Decreased functional brain connectivity in individuals with early-treated phenylketonuria: evidence from resting state fMRI./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Decreased functional brain connectivity in individuals with early-treated phenylketonuria: evidence from resting state fMRI./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Decreased functional brain connectivity in individuals with early-treated phenylketonuria: evidence from resting state fMRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Undirected thought: Neural determinants and correlates./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Undirected thought: Neural determinants and correlates./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Undirected thought: Neural determinants and correlates./Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Recent advances in structural and functional brain imaging studies of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.
edge:Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity./Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study.
edge:Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI./Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model.
edge:The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Distributed and antagonistic contributions of ongoing activity fluctuations to auditory stimulus detection.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Prefrontal-related functional connectivities within the default network are modulated by COMT val158met in healthy young adults.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Correction of low-frequency physiological noise from the resting state BOLD fMRI--Effect on ICA default mode analysis at 1.5 T.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Genetic control over the resting brain.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations.
edge:Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Prefrontal-related functional connectivities within the default network are modulated by COMT val158met in healthy young adults.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability./Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study.
edge:Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings./Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia.
edge:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data./Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain.
edge:The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data./An improved method for mapping cerebrovascular reserve using concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy with Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe).
edge:Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Exploratory structural equation modeling of resting-state fMRI: applicability of group models to individual subjects.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior./Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness.
edge:Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study./Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study.
edge:A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression./Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children./Evaluation of the post-effect of acupuncture at Sanyinjiao (SP 6) under sleep deprivation by resting-state amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation: a fMRI study.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children.
edge:Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
edge:Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity./Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder.
edge:Experience-dependent alterations in conscious resting state activity following perceptuomotor learning./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children./A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Increased sleep pressure reduces resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance./Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep.
edge:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks./Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks./Spectral characteristics of resting state networks.
edge:Transient alcohol craving suppression by rTMS of dorsal anterior cingulate: an fMRI and LORETA EEG study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Transient alcohol craving suppression by rTMS of dorsal anterior cingulate: an fMRI and LORETA EEG study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data./Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Attenuated brain response to auditory word stimulation with sevoflurane: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in humans.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Cognitive development of normal school age children: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity./Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks.
edge:Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks./Structural and functional neuroimaging studies of the suicidal brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Simulation of the effects of global normalization procedures in functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism./Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus.
edge:A cerebrovascular response model for functional neuroimaging including dynamic cerebral autoregulation./Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder.
edge:Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation./Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization.
edge:Topological fractionation of resting-state networks./Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans./Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./The role of impaired neuronal communication in neurological disorders.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:A dual-networks architecture of top-down control./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization./Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Genetic control over the resting brain.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization.
edge:Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest./Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Regional grey matter loss and brain disconnection across Alzheimer disease evolution.
edge:Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden./Disease Tracking Markers for Alzheimer's Disease at the Prodromal (MCI) Stage.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts./White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI./Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity.
edge:Chronic and treatment-resistant depression: a study using arterial spin labeling perfusion MRI at 3Tesla./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation./Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method.
edge:Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach./Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation.
edge:Genetic modulation of neural response during working memory in healthy individuals: interaction of glucocorticoid receptor and dopaminergic genes./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Genetic modulation of neural response during working memory in healthy individuals: interaction of glucocorticoid receptor and dopaminergic genes./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Genetic modulation of neural response during working memory in healthy individuals: interaction of glucocorticoid receptor and dopaminergic genes./Genetic variation in serotonin transporter alters resting brain function in healthy individuals.
edge:Genetic modulation of neural response during working memory in healthy individuals: interaction of glucocorticoid receptor and dopaminergic genes./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks.
edge:Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A./Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing.
edge:Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex./Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications.
edge:Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity./Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.
edge:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:The maturing architecture of the brain's default network./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization./Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity.
edge:Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging./Functional neuroanatomy of the hypnotic state.
edge:Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging./Three dimensional echo-planar imaging at 7 Tesla.
edge:Investigation of acupoint specificity by multivariate granger causality analysis from functional MRI data./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Investigation of acupoint specificity by multivariate granger causality analysis from functional MRI data./Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks.
edge:Investigation of acupoint specificity by multivariate granger causality analysis from functional MRI data./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks.
edge:Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder./Developmental alterations of frontal-striatal-thalamic connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Developmental alterations of frontal-striatal-thalamic connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups./Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Differential relationships between transcallosal structural and functional connectivity in young and older adults./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Differential relationships between transcallosal structural and functional connectivity in young and older adults./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Differential relationships between transcallosal structural and functional connectivity in young and older adults./Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Differential relationships between transcallosal structural and functional connectivity in young and older adults./Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
edge:Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data./Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
edge:Resting oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex./Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
edge:Resting oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Resting oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Simulation of the effects of global normalization procedures in functional MRI.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study.
edge:The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks./Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Preoperative sensorimotor mapping in brain tumor patients using spontaneous fluctuations in neuronal activity imaged with functional magnetic resonance imaging: initial experience.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity./Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.
edge:Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the infant brain./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)./Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain.
edge:Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)./An improved method for mapping cerebrovascular reserve using concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy with Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe).
edge:Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)./The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data.
edge:Utility of functional MRI in pediatric neurology./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Utility of functional MRI in pediatric neurology./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Reduced precuneus deactivation during object naming in patients with mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Reduced precuneus deactivation during object naming in patients with mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Reduced precuneus deactivation during object naming in patients with mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Comparing dynamic causal models.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Reduced precuneus deactivation during object naming in patients with mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Network discovery with DCM./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems./Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems.
edge:Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity estimation in fMRI data: influence of preprocessing and time course selection./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity estimation in fMRI data: influence of preprocessing and time course selection./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional connectivity estimation in fMRI data: influence of preprocessing and time course selection./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Resting state fMRI-guided fiber clustering.
edge:Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres./Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Unbiased group-wise image registration: applications in brain fiber tract atlas construction and functional connectivity analysis.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Lesion evidence for the critical role of the intraparietal sulcus in spatial attention./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Genetic control over the resting brain./Images-based suppression of unwanted global signals in resting-state functional connectivity studies.
edge:Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network./Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Functional connectivity estimation in fMRI data: influence of preprocessing and time course selection.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Changes in resting state effective connectivity in the motor network following rehabilitation of upper extremity poststroke paresis.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Preoperative sensorimotor mapping in brain tumor patients using spontaneous fluctuations in neuronal activity imaged with functional magnetic resonance imaging: initial experience.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability.
edge:Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks./Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity in late-life depression using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Depression, rumination and the default network.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study.
edge:Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation./Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network./MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Lifelong bilingualism maintains white matter integrity in older adults.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network./Lifelong bilingualism maintains white matter integrity in older adults.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity./Increased resting-state perfusion after repeated encoding is related to later retrieval of declarative associative memories.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Depression uncouples brain hate circuit.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study./Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks./Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Functional connectivity of the superior human temporal sulcus in the brain resting state at 3T./Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state.
edge:Functional connectivity of the superior human temporal sulcus in the brain resting state at 3T./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
edge:Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia./Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum.
edge:White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain./Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia.
edge:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network./Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Prefrontal-related functional connectivities within the default network are modulated by COMT val158met in healthy young adults.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Prefrontal-related functional connectivities within the default network are modulated by COMT val158met in healthy young adults.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait./A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism.
edge:Potential pitfall of reduced cerebral perfusion in clinical resting state functional MR imaging./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Potential pitfall of reduced cerebral perfusion in clinical resting state functional MR imaging./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:BOLD and perfusion changes during epileptic generalised spike wave activity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:BOLD and perfusion changes during epileptic generalised spike wave activity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:BOLD and perfusion changes during epileptic generalised spike wave activity./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data./Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks.
edge:Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data./Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder.
edge:Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data./Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders.
edge:Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease./Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Default network connectivity during a working memory task.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Default network connectivity during a working memory task.
edge:Brain connectivity related to working memory performance./Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Images-based suppression of unwanted global signals in resting-state functional connectivity studies.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Default network connectivity during a working memory task.
edge:Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance./Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Application of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation to the temporal lobe epilepsy with bilateral hippocampal sclerosis: an fMRI study.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age./Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children.
edge:Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Functional connectivity estimation in fMRI data: influence of preprocessing and time course selection.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network./Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction./Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder.
edge:Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Exploratory structural equation modeling of resting-state fMRI: applicability of group models to individual subjects.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Genetic control over the resting brain.
edge:Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Brain networks subserving the extraction of sentence information and its encoding to memory./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Brain networks subserving the extraction of sentence information and its encoding to memory./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Brain networks subserving the extraction of sentence information and its encoding to memory./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Brain networks subserving the extraction of sentence information and its encoding to memory.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Distributed changes in default-mode resting-state connectivity in multiple sclerosis.
edge:Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis./Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data./Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex.
edge:Quantitative BOLD: mapping of human cerebral deoxygenated blood volume and oxygen extraction fraction: default state./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Quantitative BOLD: mapping of human cerebral deoxygenated blood volume and oxygen extraction fraction: default state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden./Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men./Sex-related differences in amygdala functional connectivity during resting conditions.
edge:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men./Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
edge:Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men./Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate aftermath of acute psychological stress.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Neurophysiology of functional imaging.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain./Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy.
edge:Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI./Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection.
edge:Long-term vascular access ports as a means of sedative administration in a rodent fMRI survival model./A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Long-term vascular access ports as a means of sedative administration in a rodent fMRI survival model./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Long-term vascular access ports as a means of sedative administration in a rodent fMRI survival model./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Long-term vascular access ports as a means of sedative administration in a rodent fMRI survival model./Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Brain functional connectivity of functional magnetic resonance imaging of patients with early-onset schizophrenia.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts.
edge:Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging./Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study.
edge:Predicting decisions in human social interactions using real-time fMRI and pattern classification./Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./A default mode of brain function.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity./An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection.
edge:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction./Genetic control over the resting brain.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study./Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula./Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep./Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Dynamic changes in brain activations and functional connectivity during affectively different tactile stimuli./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Functional classification of schizophrenia using feed forward neural networks.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Abnormal amygdala connectivity in patients with primary insomnia: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal amygdala connectivity in patients with primary insomnia: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Emerging imaging tools for use with traumatic brain injury research./Exploratory structural equation modeling of resting-state fMRI: applicability of group models to individual subjects.
edge:Emerging imaging tools for use with traumatic brain injury research./Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury.
edge:Emerging imaging tools for use with traumatic brain injury research./Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./The effect of model order selection in group PICA.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./The effect of model order selection in group PICA.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI./On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity.
edge:Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered functional connectivity between the insula and the cingulate cortex in patients with Temporomandibular Disorder: A pilot study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered functional connectivity between the insula and the cingulate cortex in patients with Temporomandibular Disorder: A pilot study./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Altered functional connectivity between the insula and the cingulate cortex in patients with Temporomandibular Disorder: A pilot study./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Functional classification of schizophrenia using feed forward neural networks.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia./Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
edge:Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Increased default mode network connectivity associated with meditation./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased default mode network connectivity associated with meditation./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased default mode network connectivity associated with meditation./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia./Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network.
edge:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
edge:Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder.
edge:Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
edge:Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression./SSRI administration reduces resting state functional connectivity in dorso-medial prefrontal cortex.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI.
edge:Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal./Aberrant default mode network in subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment using resting-state functional MRI.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study./Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum./Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training./A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Functional connectivity in blood oxygenation level-dependent and cerebral blood volume-weighted resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging in the rat brain.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse./Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI./Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches./Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks.
edge:Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Increasing measurement accuracy of age-related BOLD signal change: minimizing vascular contributions by resting-state-fluctuation-of-amplitude scaling./Cerebral blood flow and BOLD responses to a memory encoding task: a comparison between healthy young and elderly adults.
edge:Increasing measurement accuracy of age-related BOLD signal change: minimizing vascular contributions by resting-state-fluctuation-of-amplitude scaling./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Increasing measurement accuracy of age-related BOLD signal change: minimizing vascular contributions by resting-state-fluctuation-of-amplitude scaling./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./How not to study spontaneous activity.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain./Prefrontal transcranial direct current stimulation changes connectivity of resting-state networks during fMRI.
edge:Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis./Correction of low-frequency physiological noise from the resting state BOLD fMRI--Effect on ICA default mode analysis at 1.5 T.
edge:Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis./Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI.
edge:Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis./Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/A default mode of brain function.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability/Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Recent advances in structural and functional brain imaging studies of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres.
edge:L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study./Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres.
edge:Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction./Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./How not to study spontaneous activity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state FMRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures.
edge:Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls./A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Effect of memantine on resting state default mode network activity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Effect of memantine on resting state default mode network activity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.
edge:Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease./Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
edge:Attenuated brain response to auditory word stimulation with sevoflurane: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in humans./Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Attenuated brain response to auditory word stimulation with sevoflurane: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in humans./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men./Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets.
edge:ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation.
edge:Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method./Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy.
edge:Restoration of mammillothalamic functional connectivity through thiamine replacement therapy in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Restoration of mammillothalamic functional connectivity through thiamine replacement therapy in Wernicke's encephalopathy./Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations.
edge:Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Differential temporo-parietal cortical networks that support relational and item-based recency judgments./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis./Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks.
edge:Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./A functional magnetic resonance imaging study on the neural mechanisms of hyperalgesic nocebo effect.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Spatially extended FMRI signal response to stimulus in non-functionally relevant regions of the human brain: preliminary results./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Reading networks at rest./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Reading networks at rest./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Reading networks at rest./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Distributed and antagonistic contributions of ongoing activity fluctuations to auditory stimulus detection.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults.
edge:Reading networks at rest./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults./Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state.
edge:Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state./Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence.
edge:Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state./Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
edge:Dissociating mental states related to doing nothing by means of fMRI pattern classification./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Dissociating mental states related to doing nothing by means of fMRI pattern classification./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Dissociating mental states related to doing nothing by means of fMRI pattern classification./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Dissociating mental states related to doing nothing by means of fMRI pattern classification./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis./Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Real versus imagined locomotion: a [18F]-FDG PET-fMRI comparison.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression./Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Cluster analysis detection of functional MRI activity in temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration./Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations.
edge:Motor pathway injury in patients with periventricular leucomalacia and spastic diplegia./Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study./Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children.
edge:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI./Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI./Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Neurophysiology of functional imaging.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./The dynamical balance of the brain at rest.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI.
edge:Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./How not to study spontaneous activity.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain./Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex.
edge:Differential involvement of striato- and cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathways in tremor- and akinetic/rigid-predominant Parkinson's disease./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Differential involvement of striato- and cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathways in tremor- and akinetic/rigid-predominant Parkinson's disease./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Differential involvement of striato- and cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathways in tremor- and akinetic/rigid-predominant Parkinson's disease./Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI./Contour-based registration technique to differentiate between task-activated and head motion-induced signal variations in fMRI.
edge:Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network.
edge:Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network.
edge:Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study./Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Group ICA of resting-state data: a comparison.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network./Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses.
edge:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Defining neurocognitive networks in the BOLD new world of computed connectivity.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
edge:Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment./Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Neural origin of spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations in rats under burst-suppression anesthesia condition.
edge:Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain./Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Neural origin of spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations in rats under burst-suppression anesthesia condition.
edge:Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations.
edge:Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study./Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
edge:Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:fMRI as a Measure of Cognition Related Brain Circuitry in Schizophrenia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:fMRI as a Measure of Cognition Related Brain Circuitry in Schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:fMRI as a Measure of Cognition Related Brain Circuitry in Schizophrenia./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:fMRI as a Measure of Cognition Related Brain Circuitry in Schizophrenia./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area.
edge:Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity during resting-state functional MR imaging: Study of the correspondence between independent component analysis and region-of-interest-based methods.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./BOLD and perfusion changes during epileptic generalised spike wave activity.
edge:Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.
edge:Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Decreased regional homogeneity in major depression as revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Brain functions in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder combined and inattentive subtypes: A resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal./Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Diffusion tensor imaging and resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging on young patients with major depressive disorder.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Neural origin of spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations in rats under burst-suppression anesthesia condition.
edge:Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses./Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI./Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity.
edge:Neuroimaging of cortical development and brain connectivity in human newborns and animal models./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Neuroimaging of cortical development and brain connectivity in human newborns and animal models./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Neuroimaging of cortical development and brain connectivity in human newborns and animal models./Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
edge:Neuroimaging of cortical development and brain connectivity in human newborns and animal models./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing.
edge:Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain./Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./A comparison of signal instability in 2D and 3D EPI resting-state fMRI.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
edge:Depression recognition using resting-state and event-related fMRI signals./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Depression recognition using resting-state and event-related fMRI signals./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Depression recognition using resting-state and event-related fMRI signals./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Depression recognition using resting-state and event-related fMRI signals./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain./Depression recognition using resting-state and event-related fMRI signals.
edge:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure./Analysis of EEG-fMRI data in focal epilepsy based on automated spike classification and Signal Space Projection.
edge:Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./A default mode of brain function.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Lifelong bilingualism maintains white matter integrity in older adults./Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.
edge:Lifelong bilingualism maintains white matter integrity in older adults./Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Resisting emotional interference: brain regions facilitating working memory performance during negative distraction.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression.
edge:Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression./Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
edge:Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study./Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./A default mode of brain function.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Atypical default network connectivity in youth with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
edge:Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Correlations in spontaneous activity and gray matter density between left and right sensoritmotor areas of pianists.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity./Changes occur in resting state network of motor system during 4 weeks of motor skill learning.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts./Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling./Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts.
edge:Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging resting-state connectivity in periaqueductal gray networks in migraine./Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition.
edge:Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging resting-state connectivity in periaqueductal gray networks in migraine./Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging resting-state connectivity in periaqueductal gray networks in migraine./Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.
edge:Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging resting-state connectivity in periaqueductal gray networks in migraine./Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Conditional mutual information maps as descriptors of net connectivity levels in the brain.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Functional connectivity analysis of super acute cerebral ischemia in rats: a resting-state functional MRI empirical study.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat./Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging resting-state connectivity in periaqueductal gray networks in migraine.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain./Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Cluster analysis detection of functional MRI activity in temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study.
edge:Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls./Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Default mode of brain function in monkeys./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Default mode of brain function in monkeys./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default mode of brain function in monkeys./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default mode of brain function in monkeys./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Default mode of brain function in monkeys./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Default mode of brain function in monkeys./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys./Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions./Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions.
edge:Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity./Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI.
edge:Resting functional connectivity in patients with brain tumors in eloquent areas./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting functional connectivity in patients with brain tumors in eloquent areas./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Attenuated brain response to auditory word stimulation with sevoflurane: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in humans.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Spatial nonuniformity of the resting CBF and BOLD responses to sevoflurane: in vivo study of normal human subjects with magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./A cross-modal system linking primary auditory and visual cortices: evidence from intrinsic fMRI connectivity analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Resting functional connectivity in patients with brain tumors in eloquent areas.
edge:Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans./Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.
edge:Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy./Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Simulation of the effects of global normalization procedures in functional MRI.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Reduced negative BOLD responses in the default-mode network and increased self-focus in depression.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers./SSRI administration reduces resting state functional connectivity in dorso-medial prefrontal cortex.
edge:Hypnotic induction decreases anterior default mode activity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Hypnotic induction decreases anterior default mode activity./Functional neuroanatomy of the hypnotic state.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Spontaneous fMRI activity during resting wakefulness and sleep.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Nicotine effects on default mode network during resting state.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Hypnotic modulation of resting state fMRI default mode and extrinsic network connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Aberrant default mode network in subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment using resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Emotional faces and the default mode network.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks./The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure.
edge:Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation./Effects of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on human regional cerebral blood flow.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches.
edge:Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity./Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy./Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach./Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.
edge:Social fearfulness in the human brain./Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Social fearfulness in the human brain./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Social fearfulness in the human brain./Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Social fearfulness in the human brain./Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Social fearfulness in the human brain./Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization.
edge:Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest./Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
edge:Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders./Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest.
edge:The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study.
edge:Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network./Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Cluster analysis detection of functional MRI activity in temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI./Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging./Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury.
edge:Resting network plasticity following brain injury./Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Disrupted functional connectivity of the pain network in fibromyalgia.
edge:Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity./Decreased intrinsic brain connectivity is associated with reduced clinical pain in fibromyalgia.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy./Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention./Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy.
edge:Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./Three dimensional echo-planar imaging at 7 Tesla.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./Three dimensional echo-planar imaging at 7 Tesla.
edge:Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems./Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.
edge:Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma./Hypnotic modulation of resting state fMRI default mode and extrinsic network connectivity.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Brain imaging of the self--conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain imaging of the self--conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain imaging of the self--conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues./GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.
edge:Brain imaging of the self--conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues./The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures.
edge:Brain imaging of the self--conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues./How not to study spontaneous activity.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Neuroimaging after coma.
edge:Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity./Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./A default mode of brain function.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures.
edge:I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Frontal-to-parietal top-down causal streams along the dorsal attention network exclusively mediate voluntary orienting of attention./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Frontal-to-parietal top-down causal streams along the dorsal attention network exclusively mediate voluntary orienting of attention./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Frontal-to-parietal top-down causal streams along the dorsal attention network exclusively mediate voluntary orienting of attention./Pseudo-continuous transfer insensitive labeling technique.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./A default mode of brain function.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Brain networks subserving the extraction of sentence information and its encoding to memory.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./A comparison of five fMRI protocols for mapping speech comprehension systems.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./On consciousness, resting state fMRI, and neurodynamics.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation./Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./Schizophrenic patients and their unaffected siblings share increased resting-state connectivity in the task-negative network but not Its anticorrelated task-positive network.
edge:Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia./Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.
edge:Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease./The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI.
edge:Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease./Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling.
edge:Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:A multiscale analysis of the temporal characteristics of resting-state fMRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A multiscale analysis of the temporal characteristics of resting-state fMRI data./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
edge:A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
edge:Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)./Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain.
edge:Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI./Modulation of large-scale brain networks by transcranial direct current stimulation evidenced by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Comparing dynamic causal models.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI./Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity./Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study.
edge:fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep./Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.
edge:Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias./Resting bold fMRI differentiates dementia with Lewy bodies vs Alzheimer disease.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Neuronal networks in children with continuous spikes and waves during slow sleep.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function./Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation./Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study.
edge:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation./Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation.
edge:Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation./Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study.
edge:Three dimensional echo-planar imaging at 7 Tesla./Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function.
edge:Three dimensional echo-planar imaging at 7 Tesla./Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders./Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./The role of nonlinearity in computing graph-theoretical properties of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging brain networks.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state FMRI.
edge:Functional network organization of the human brain./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy.
edge:Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Hypnotic induction decreases anterior default mode activity.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy./Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Spatial nonuniformity of the resting CBF and BOLD responses to sevoflurane: in vivo study of normal human subjects with magnetic resonance imaging./Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function.
edge:Spatial nonuniformity of the resting CBF and BOLD responses to sevoflurane: in vivo study of normal human subjects with magnetic resonance imaging./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Changes of brain structure and function in ADHD children./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes of brain structure and function in ADHD children./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study.
edge:Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder./Altered resting-state amygdala functional connectivity in men with posttraumatic stress disorder.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex.
edge:Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex./Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder.
edge:Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Reaching across the abyss: recent advances in functional magnetic resonance imaging and their potential relevance to disorders of consciousness.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Distributed and antagonistic contributions of ongoing activity fluctuations to auditory stimulus detection.
edge:Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Genetic variation in serotonin transporter alters resting brain function in healthy individuals./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./MATLAB toolbox for functional connectivity.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression./Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects./The effect of model order selection in group PICA.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
edge:Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings./Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury.
edge:Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./How not to study spontaneous activity.
edge:A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy./Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS.
edge:Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Sex-related differences in amygdala functional connectivity during resting conditions.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI./Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome./Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state.
edge:Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications./Distributed changes in default-mode resting-state connectivity in multiple sclerosis.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI./Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder.
edge:Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty./Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity./Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia./Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Functional classification of schizophrenia using feed forward neural networks.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.
edge:Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex.
edge:Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance./Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure./The default mode network: cognitive role and pathological disturbances.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity./Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
edge:Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS./Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity.
edge:From EEG to BOLD: brain mapping and estimating transfer functions in simultaneous EEG-fMRI acquisitions./Interpreting functional imaging studies in terms of neurotransmitter cycling.
edge:From EEG to BOLD: brain mapping and estimating transfer functions in simultaneous EEG-fMRI acquisitions./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:From EEG to BOLD: brain mapping and estimating transfer functions in simultaneous EEG-fMRI acquisitions./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:From EEG to BOLD: brain mapping and estimating transfer functions in simultaneous EEG-fMRI acquisitions./Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep./Increased sleep pressure reduces resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Higher-order contrast functions improve performance of independent component analysis of fMRI data./Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data.
edge:Higher-order contrast functions improve performance of independent component analysis of fMRI data./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Higher-order contrast functions improve performance of independent component analysis of fMRI data./Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Gender-related differences in functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Gender-related differences in functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Gender-related differences in functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Gender-related differences in functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./A cross-modal system linking primary auditory and visual cortices: evidence from intrinsic fMRI connectivity analysis.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Neurophysiology of functional imaging.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
edge:Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity./Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Group ICA of resting-state data: a comparison.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Group ICA of resting-state data: a comparison.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state FMRI.
edge:Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'./Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep.
edge:Exploiting the potential of three dimensional spatial wavelet analysis to explore nesting of temporal oscillations and spatial variance in simultaneous EEG-fMRI data./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Exploiting the potential of three dimensional spatial wavelet analysis to explore nesting of temporal oscillations and spatial variance in simultaneous EEG-fMRI data./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Exploiting the potential of three dimensional spatial wavelet analysis to explore nesting of temporal oscillations and spatial variance in simultaneous EEG-fMRI data./Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation.
edge:Exploiting the potential of three dimensional spatial wavelet analysis to explore nesting of temporal oscillations and spatial variance in simultaneous EEG-fMRI data./Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control./Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
edge:Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Structural and functional MRI in mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Update on the magnetic resonance imaging core of the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder.
edge:Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces./Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
edge:The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury.
edge:Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders./Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury.
edge:Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis.
edge:Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data./Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study./Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Preoperative sensorimotor mapping in brain tumor patients using spontaneous fluctuations in neuronal activity imaged with functional magnetic resonance imaging: initial experience.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI./Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.
edge:Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest./Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.
edge:Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal./Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS).
edge:Interpreting functional imaging studies in terms of neurotransmitter cycling./Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal frontoparietal and basal ganglia-cortical networks.
edge:Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging./Interpreting functional imaging studies in terms of neurotransmitter cycling.
edge:Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:The selectivity and functional connectivity of the anterior temporal lobes./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:The selectivity and functional connectivity of the anterior temporal lobes./Directional connectivity of resting state human fMRI data using cascaded ICA-PDC analysis.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.
edge:Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Neuronal networks in children with continuous spikes and waves during slow sleep./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease./Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach.
edge:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia.
edge:Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach./Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Dynamic changes in brain activations and functional connectivity during affectively different tactile stimuli.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation.
edge:Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment./Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.
edge:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study./Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test.
edge:Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study./Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury.
edge:Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test./Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.
edge:Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Network discovery with DCM.
edge:The future of FMRI connectivity./Spectral characteristics of resting state networks.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants./Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Preoperative sensorimotor mapping in brain tumor patients using spontaneous fluctuations in neuronal activity imaged with functional magnetic resonance imaging: initial experience.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain./The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state FMRI.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness.
edge:Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness./Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.
edge:Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence./The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Default network and intelligence difference.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Prefrontal-related functional connectivities within the default network are modulated by COMT val158met in healthy young adults.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
edge:Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy./Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./A default mode of brain function.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./MATLAB toolbox for functional connectivity.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy.
edge:REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Structural and functional MRI in mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease./Aberrant default mode network in subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment using resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia./Spectral characteristics of resting state networks.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks.
edge:Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease./Energy-based stochastic control of neural mass models suggests time-varying effective connectivity in the resting state.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:I remember you: A role for memory in social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their interaction./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:I remember you: A role for memory in social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their interaction./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:I remember you: A role for memory in social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their interaction./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:I remember you: A role for memory in social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their interaction./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:I remember you: A role for memory in social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their interaction./The selectivity and functional connectivity of the anterior temporal lobes.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Emotional faces and the default mode network./Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks./Emotional faces and the default mode network.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Spontaneous fMRI activity during resting wakefulness and sleep.
edge:Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation./Anesthetic mechanisms revealed by functional brain imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model/Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model/Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model/Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model/Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model/Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model/Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression./Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity./Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
edge:Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity./Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression.
edge:Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders./Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder.
edge:Components of variance in a multicentre functional MRI study and implications for calculation of statistical power./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Components of variance in a multicentre functional MRI study and implications for calculation of statistical power./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease./Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children./Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children./Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model./Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Genetic control over the resting brain.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Nicotine effects on default mode network during resting state.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead./Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Brain activation in complex partial seizures during switching from a the goal-directed task to a resting state: comparison of fMRI maps to the default mode network.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis.
edge:Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients./Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Distributed and antagonistic contributions of ongoing activity fluctuations to auditory stimulus detection.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state./Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state.
edge:Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis./Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity./Effects of training of processing speed on neural systems.
edge:Effects of training of processing speed on neural systems./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity.
edge:Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences./Increased resting-state perfusion after repeated encoding is related to later retrieval of declarative associative memories.
edge:Nicotine effects on default mode network during resting state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Nicotine effects on default mode network during resting state./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Nicotine effects on default mode network during resting state./Group ICA of resting-state data: a comparison.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Depression uncouples brain hate circuit./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control./Depression uncouples brain hate circuit.
edge:A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control./Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.
edge:Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure./White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.
edge:Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents.
edge:Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children./Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination.
edge:Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents./Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children.
edge:Neuroimaging technique: a diagnostic tool to detect altered states of consciousness./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Neuroimaging technique: a diagnostic tool to detect altered states of consciousness./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Neuroimaging technique: a diagnostic tool to detect altered states of consciousness./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./The resting human brain and motor learning.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Interregional brain interactions in children with unilateral hearing loss./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Interregional brain interactions in children with unilateral hearing loss./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Interregional brain interactions in children with unilateral hearing loss./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Interregional brain interactions in children with unilateral hearing loss./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Interregional brain interactions in children with unilateral hearing loss./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Recent advances in structural and functional brain imaging studies of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./BOLD correlates of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Increased sleep pressure reduces resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain./The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state FMRI.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./An improved method for mapping cerebrovascular reserve using concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy with Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe).
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI.
edge:Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain./Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain.
edge:An improved method for mapping cerebrovascular reserve using concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy with Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe)./Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain.
edge:Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI./An improved method for mapping cerebrovascular reserve using concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy with Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe).
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Schizophrenic patients and their unaffected siblings share increased resting-state connectivity in the task-negative network but not Its anticorrelated task-positive network.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study./Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal frontoparietal and basal ganglia-cortical networks.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus./Differential activity of subgenual cingulate and brainstem in panic disorder and PTSD.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Defining neurocognitive networks in the BOLD new world of computed connectivity.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks.
edge:The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum./Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.
edge:Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Simulation of the effects of global normalization procedures in functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
edge:Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience./Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
edge:Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients./Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression.
edge:Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients./Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Modulation of CNS pain circuitry by intravenous and sublingual doses of buprenorphine.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents./Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep.
edge:Modulation of CNS pain circuitry by intravenous and sublingual doses of buprenorphine./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functionally specific changes in resting-state sensorimotor networks after motor learning./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics./Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis.
edge:Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data./Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks.
edge:Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity./Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Functional connectivity of dissociation in patients with psychogenic non-epileptic seizures./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Functional connectivity of dissociation in patients with psychogenic non-epileptic seizures./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Functional connectivity of dissociation in patients with psychogenic non-epileptic seizures.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation./Prefrontal transcranial direct current stimulation changes connectivity of resting-state networks during fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Investigation of high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging by means of surface and array radiofrequency coils at 7 T.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization./Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI./Genetic control over the resting brain.
edge:Methods of the pharmacological imaging of the cannabinoid system (PhICS) study: towards understanding the role of the brain endocannabinoid system in human cognition./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate aftermath of acute psychological stress./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study./Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
edge:Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study./Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate aftermath of acute psychological stress.
edge:Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study./Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
edge:Causes and consequences of cerebral small vessel disease. The RUN DMC study: a prospective cohort study. Study rationale and protocol./Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Slow brain oscillations of sleep, resting state, and vigilance.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness.
edge:Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients./Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Hypnotic modulation of resting state fMRI default mode and extrinsic network connectivity.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Undirected thought: Neural determinants and correlates.
edge:Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self./Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Distributed and antagonistic contributions of ongoing activity fluctuations to auditory stimulus detection.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Functional connectivity in elderly controls and AD patients using resting state fMRI: a pilot study.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression./Multi-subject dictionary learning to segment an atlas of brain spontaneous activity.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate aftermath of acute psychological stress.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Endogenous cortisol is associated with functional connectivity between the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Endogenous cortisol is associated with functional connectivity between the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex./Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
edge:Endogenous cortisol is associated with functional connectivity between the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex./Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures.
edge:Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies./Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies.
edge:Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies./Joint Modeling of Anatomical and Functional Connectivity for Population Studies.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Functional classification of schizophrenia using feed forward neural networks.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies./Resting state functional MRI in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations./Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Functional connectivity between brain regions involved in learning words of a new language.
edge:Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study./Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity./Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.
edge:Development of the brain's functional network architecture./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Development of the brain's functional network architecture./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Development of the brain's functional network architecture./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Autism spectrum traits in the typical population predict structure and function in the posterior superior temporal sulcus./Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network.
edge:Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults./Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis./Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity.
edge:Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
edge:Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability.
edge:Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals./Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Cluster analysis detection of functional MRI activity in temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients.
edge:Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion.
edge:Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data./Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Alteration of resting brain function by genetic variation in angiotensin converting enzyme in amnestic-type mild cognitive impairment of Chinese Han.
edge:Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression./Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks./Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks./Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Neural Encoding of Objects Relevant for Navigation and Resting State Correlations with Navigational Ability./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Neural Encoding of Objects Relevant for Navigation and Resting State Correlations with Navigational Ability./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Neural Encoding of Objects Relevant for Navigation and Resting State Correlations with Navigational Ability./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Neural Encoding of Objects Relevant for Navigation and Resting State Correlations with Navigational Ability./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Resting state networks in human cervical spinal cord observed with fMRI./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus./Genetic control over the resting brain.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia./Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Simulation of the effects of global normalization procedures in functional MRI.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults.
edge:Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.
edge:Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders./Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography./Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Recovery of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG.
edge:Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain./Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain.
edge:Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia./Default network connectivity during a working memory task.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Schizophrenic patients and their unaffected siblings share increased resting-state connectivity in the task-negative network but not Its anticorrelated task-positive network.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Depression, rumination and the default network.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
edge:Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology./Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal.
edge:Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:An alternative approach towards assessing and accounting for individual motion in fMRI timeseries./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:An alternative approach towards assessing and accounting for individual motion in fMRI timeseries./Contour-based registration technique to differentiate between task-activated and head motion-induced signal variations in fMRI.
edge:An alternative approach towards assessing and accounting for individual motion in fMRI timeseries./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:An alternative approach towards assessing and accounting for individual motion in fMRI timeseries./Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.
edge:An alternative approach towards assessing and accounting for individual motion in fMRI timeseries./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension./A default mode of brain function.
edge:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI./The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.
edge:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging of resting-state cerebral blood flow in preclinical Huntington's disease.
edge:Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder./Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area.
edge:Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations./Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.
edge:Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging of resting-state cerebral blood flow in preclinical Huntington's disease./Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability.
edge:Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia./Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition./A brain functional connectivity analysis based on independent component analysis.
edge:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition./Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy.
edge:Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition./Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state./Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state./Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.
edge:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Spontaneous fMRI activity during resting wakefulness and sleep.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Spectral characteristics of resting state networks.
edge:Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks./Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS.
edge:Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
edge:Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Sources of systematic bias in hypercapnia-calibrated functional MRI estimation of oxygen metabolism.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.
edge:Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study./Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression./Altered default mode network activity in patient with anxiety disorders: an fMRI study.
edge:Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease./Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity./Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS.
edge:Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain./Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition.
edge:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain./Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data.
edge:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain./Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Defining neurocognitive networks in the BOLD new world of computed connectivity.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients.
edge:Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts./Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in late-life depression using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study./Increasing measurement accuracy of age-related BOLD signal change: minimizing vascular contributions by resting-state-fluctuation-of-amplitude scaling.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Detecting functional connectivity in the resting brain: a comparison between ICA and CCA.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Reading networks at rest.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states./Changes occur in resting state network of motor system during 4 weeks of motor skill learning.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Sources of systematic bias in hypercapnia-calibrated functional MRI estimation of oxygen metabolism.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states.
edge:The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans./Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.
edge:Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies./Short-term meditation increases network efficiency of the anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.
edge:Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Default mode of brain function in monkeys.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load./Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies.
edge:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots./Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks./Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex.
edge:Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study.
edge:Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study./Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke./Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:A combined neuropsychological and brain imaging study of obstructive sleep apnea./A default mode of brain function.
edge:A combined neuropsychological and brain imaging study of obstructive sleep apnea./Decreased brain activation during a working memory task at rested baseline is associated with vulnerability to sleep deprivation.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./A combined neuropsychological and brain imaging study of obstructive sleep apnea.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity./Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.
edge:Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy./Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Correction of low-frequency physiological noise from the resting state BOLD fMRI--Effect on ICA default mode analysis at 1.5 T.
edge:Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study./Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./The effect of model order selection in group PICA.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study./Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Altered resting-state functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity of hippocampus in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation./Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia.
edge:Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State./Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.
edge:Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals./Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing./Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
edge:Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus./Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease./Localization of brain activity by temporal anti-correlation with the posterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state./Intrinsically organized network for word processing during the resting state.
edge:Alteration of resting brain function by genetic variation in angiotensin converting enzyme in amnestic-type mild cognitive impairment of Chinese Han./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Alteration of resting brain function by genetic variation in angiotensin converting enzyme in amnestic-type mild cognitive impairment of Chinese Han./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Alteration of resting brain function by genetic variation in angiotensin converting enzyme in amnestic-type mild cognitive impairment of Chinese Han./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Alteration of resting brain function by genetic variation in angiotensin converting enzyme in amnestic-type mild cognitive impairment of Chinese Han./Imaging genomics.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./A default mode of brain function.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in "default mode" brain regions.
edge:fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Default mode of brain activity demonstrated by positron emission tomography imaging in awake monkeys: higher rest-related than working memory-related activity in medial cortical areas.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals./Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system./Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Localization of brain activity by temporal anti-correlation with the posterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./Restricted canonical correlation analysis in functional MRI-validation and a novel thresholding technique.
edge:A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
edge:Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy./Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection.
edge:Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity./Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.
edge:Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study./Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Resting network plasticity following brain injury.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder./Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.
edge:Distinct resting-state brain activities in heroin-dependent individuals./Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.
edge:Distinct resting-state brain activities in heroin-dependent individuals./Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.
edge:Distinct resting-state brain activities in heroin-dependent individuals./Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Distinct resting-state brain activities in heroin-dependent individuals./Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Structural and functional MRI in mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Large-scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: insights from functional neuroimaging.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Schizophrenic patients and their unaffected siblings share increased resting-state connectivity in the task-negative network but not Its anticorrelated task-positive network.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest.
edge:Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI./Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Functional connectivity analysis of the brain network using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load.
edge:Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks./Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection./Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease based on two intrinsically anti-correlated networks with resting-state fMRI.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Increased regional homogeneity of blood oxygen level-dependent signals in occipital cortex of early blind individuals.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy.
edge:Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity./Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.
edge:Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex./Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Functional connectivity changes with concentration of sevoflurane anesthesia.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Application of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation to the temporal lobe epilepsy with bilateral hippocampal sclerosis: an fMRI study.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.
edge:BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat./Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for word processing during the resting state./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for word processing during the resting state./Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state.
edge:Intrinsically organized network for word processing during the resting state./Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./Prefrontal-related functional connectivities within the default network are modulated by COMT val158met in healthy young adults.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
edge:Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis./Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Changes in resting state effective connectivity in the motor network following rehabilitation of upper extremity poststroke paresis.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Impact of Alzheimer's disease on the functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes.
edge:Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease./Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study./Application of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation to the temporal lobe epilepsy with bilateral hippocampal sclerosis: an fMRI study.
edge:Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes./Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states./Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
edge:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states./Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.
edge:Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states./Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Discriminative analysis of brain function at resting-state for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Depression, rumination and the default network.
edge:Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients./Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.
edge:Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional connectivity MRI in normal and pathological brain networks.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients.
edge:Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain./Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./A default mode of brain function.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Changes in functional connectivity of human MT/V5 with visual motion input.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study./Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Simultaneous assessment of flow and BOLD signals in resting-state functional connectivity maps.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./A default mode of brain function.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Decreased regional homogeneity in schizophrenia: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Abnormal neural activity in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity.
edge:Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state./REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Resting-state networks in the infant brain.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Development of the brain's functional network architecture.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Functional disconnection and compensation in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from DLPFC connectivity using resting-state fMRI.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults.
edge:Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy./Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach./A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./A default mode of brain function.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Application of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation to the temporal lobe epilepsy with bilateral hippocampal sclerosis: an fMRI study.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Large-scale directional connections among multi resting-state neural networks in human brain: a functional MRI and Bayesian network modeling study.
edge:The oscillating brain: complex and reliable./Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state.
edge:Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion./MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.
edge:Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion./Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.
edge:Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion./Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.
edge:Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion./Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in neurotypical adults.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Toward discovery science of human brain function.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Network discovery with DCM.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres.
edge:Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome./Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization.
