title	citation_count
	0
Default-mode network activity distinguishes amnestic type mild cognitive impairment from healthy aging: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.	14
Detection of PCC functional connectivity characteristics in resting-state fMRI in mild Alzheimer's disease.	16
Using a self-organizing map algorithm to detect age-related changes in functional connectivity during rest in autism spectrum disorders.	23
Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain.	16
Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality.	28
Brain connectivity is not only lower but different in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approach.	14
Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with non-neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.	11
Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the level of default mode functional connectivity.	21
Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral blood flow during the resting state.	32
The discovery of population differences in network community structure: New methods and applications to brain functional networks in schizophrenia.	11
Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study.	17
Task-driven ICA feature generation for accurate and interpretable prediction using fMRI.	13
Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain.	17
Resting-state functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression.	10
A genetically modulated, intrinsic cingulate circuit supports human nicotine addiction.	7
Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients.	22
Functional connectivity of cortical motor areas in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.	18
Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging.	11
Changes of brain structure and function in ADHD children.	10
To act or not to act. Neural correlates of executive control of learned motor behavior.	0
Real versus imagined locomotion: a [18F]-FDG PET-fMRI comparison.	0
Estimation of the intrinsic dimensionality of fMRI data.	1
Mapping the altered patterns of cerebellar resting-state function in longitudinal amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients.	13
Functional alterations of large-scale brain networks related to cognitive control in obsessive-compulsive disorder.	17
The Putative Visual Word Form Area Is Functionally Connected to the Dorsal Attention Network.	13
Altered default mode network connectivity in alzheimer's disease-A resting functional MRI and bayesian network study.	0
Are brain networks stable during a 24-hour period?	27
Default mode network disruption secondary to a lesion in the anterior thalamus.	8
Driving and driven architectures of directed small-world human brain functional networks.	25
Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI.	60
Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state fMRI data.	34
Experience-dependent alterations in conscious resting state activity following perceptuomotor learning.	2
Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity patterns of the putamen in medication-na\"{\i}ve children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.	16
Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity.	13
Identifying the default-mode component in spatial IC analyses of patients with disorders of consciousness.	32
Impairments in cognition and resting-state connectivity of the hippocampus in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes.	7
Integrated local correlation: a new measure of local coherence in fMRI data.	11
Functional network organization of the human brain.	25
Regional homogeneity in depression and its relationship with separate depressive symptom clusters: a resting-state fMRI study.	6
Simulation of the effects of global normalization procedures in functional MRI.	0
Resting-state functional network correlates of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.	16
Effects of heartbeat and respiration on macaque fMRI: implications for functional connectivity.	13
Functional connectivity and coactivation of the nucleus accumbens: A combined functional connectivity and structure-based meta-analysis.	19
Reduced resting-state brain activity in the "default network" in normal aging.	17
Correlated low-frequency BOLD fluctuations in the resting human brain are modulated by recent experience in category-preferential visual regions.	33
Detection of physiological noise in resting state fMRI using machine learning.	9
Hemispheric asymmetry of visual scene processing in the human brain: evidence from repetition priming and intrinsic activity.	22
Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model.	34
Asymmetric connectivity reduction and its relationship to "HAROLD" in aging brain.	8
Localization of cerebral functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.	22
Modulation of CNS pain circuitry by intravenous and sublingual doses of buprenorphine.	2
Exploring resting-state functional connectivity with total interdependence.	28
Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson's disease.	15
APOE4 allele disrupts resting state fMRI connectivity in the absence of amyloid plaques or decreased CSF A$\beta$42.	7
Decreased functional brain connectivity in individuals with early-treated phenylketonuria: evidence from resting state fMRI.	5
Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups.	16
The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable.	41
Structural and functional cerebral impairments in cirrhotic patients with a history of overt hepatic encephalopathy.	7
Using spatial multiple regression to identify intrinsic connectivity networks involved in working memory performance.	34
White matter microstructure underlying default mode network connectivity in the human brain.	18
Assessing the influence of different ROI selection strategies on functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data acquired during steady-state conditions.	23
Alzheimer Disease: evaluation of a functional MR imaging index as a marker.	2
Altered resting state networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures.	19
Resting states affect spontaneous BOLD oscillations in sensory and paralimbic cortex.	17
Predicting conceptual processing capacity from spontaneous neuronal activity of the left middle temporal gyrus.	11
The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain.	22
Functional networks in the anesthetized rat brain revealed by independent component analysis of resting-state FMRI.	30
Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the first two years of life.	17
Disrupted functional connectivity in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state fMRI study.	12
Specific and nonspecific thalamocortical functional connectivity in normal and vegetative states.	7
Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism.	23
To wake or not to wake? The two-sided nature of the human K-complex.	10
The future of FMRI connectivity.	15
Resting-state brain organization revealed by functional covariance networks.	36
Altered functional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.	27
Metabolic origin of BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of stimuli.	10
Non-parametric model selection for subject-specific topological organization of resting-state functional connectivity.	21
Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using magnetoencephalography.	9
Spontaneous brain activity changes in children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis: A resting-state fMRI study.	10
The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis.	26
Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing connectivity patterns in FMRI data of the human brain.	16
Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI.	7
Switching between executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations in functional connectivity.	29
Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion imaging.	6
Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks.	10
Three dimensional echo-planar imaging at 7 Tesla.	2
Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with the resting-state functional MRI signal.	11
Changes of resting state brain networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.	19
Resting-state brain activity in adult males who stutter.	21
Diagnostic power of default mode network resting state fMRI in the detection of Alzheimer's disease.	15
Intrinsic interhemispheric hippocampal functional connectivity predicts individual differences in memory performance ability.	10
Genetic variation in serotonin transporter alters resting brain function in healthy individuals.	1
The role of left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex during episodic decisions: semantic elaboration or resolution of episodic interference?	1
Abnormalities of intrinsic functional connectivity in autism spectrum disorders.	19
Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.	18
Reading networks at rest.	40
A cerebrovascular response model for functional neuroimaging including dynamic cerebral autoregulation.	1
A preliminary study of the dysregulation of the resting networks in first-episode medication-naive adolescent depression.	8
Functional connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI measurements during rest.	7
Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum.	26
Brain connectivity related to working memory performance.	13
Alteration of brain functional network at rest and in response to YMCA physical stress test in concussed athletes: RsFMRI study.	7
Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series.	14
MRI of neuronal network structure, function, and plasticity.	20
Development of the brain's functional network architecture.	11
Structures involved at the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of EEG/fMRI data.	3
A simple and objective method for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI.	9
Effect of resting-state functional MR imaging duration on stability of graph theory metrics of brain network connectivity.	16
Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study.	26
Cross hippocampal influence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging.	9
Default-mode network connectivity and white matter burden in late-life depression.	6
Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity.	8
Hierarchical functional modularity in the resting-state human brain.	7
Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.	18
Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in "resting-state" data.	2
Functional alterations in memory networks in early Alzheimer's disease.	19
A wavelet-based method for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG.	7
Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson's disease.	5
A parallel functional topography between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: evidence and implications for cognitive control.	7
High b-value diffusion-weighted fMRI in a rat forepaw electrostimulation model at 7 T.	0
Multivariate network-level approach to detect interactions between large-scale functional systems.	10
Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans.	30
Functional resting-state networks are differentially affected in schizophrenia.	30
Discovering imaging endophenotypes for major depression.	15
Hemisphere- and gender-related differences in small-world brain networks: a resting-state functional MRI study.	9
Discovering the somatotopic organization of the motor areas of the medial wall using low-frequency BOLD fluctuations.	21
Multimodal analysis of resting state cortical activity: what does EEG add to our knowledge of resting state BOLD networks?	8
The default mode network and EEG alpha oscillations: An independent component analysis.	14
Anxiety dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the amygdala at rest.	13
Nicotine effects on default mode network during resting state.	8
Functional connectivity of the superior human temporal sulcus in the brain resting state at 3T.	3
Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.	20
Paradigm shift in translational neuroimaging of CNS disorders.	28
Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks.	21
Empirical comparison of sources of variation for FMRI connectivity analysis.	8
Brain connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma.	17
Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia.	11
REST: A toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing.	38
Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in diabetic neuropathic pain.	19
Modulation of functional connectivity during the resting state and the motor task.	7
Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis.	10
Hemispheric asymmetry in cognitive division of anterior cingulate cortex: a resting-state functional connectivity study.	17
Comparing dynamic causal models.	0
A group model for stable multi-subject ICA on fMRI datasets.	25
Brain state regulation during normal development: Intrinsic activity fluctuations in simultaneous EEG-fMRI.	37
Origin of synchronized low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations in the primary visual cortex.	18
An alternative approach towards assessing and accounting for individual motion in fMRI timeseries.	6
Human Parietofrontal Networks Related to Action Observation Detected at Rest.	16
Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression - the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula.	25
Comprehensive in vivo mapping of the human basal ganglia and thalamic connectome in individuals using 7T MRI.	7
The role of physiological noise in resting-state functional connectivity.	27
Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia.	31
Introducing graph theory to track for neuroplastic alterations in the resting human brain: a transcranial direct current stimulation study.	10
Lesion evidence for the critical role of the intraparietal sulcus in spatial attention.	2
Selective aberrant functional connectivity of resting state networks in social anxiety disorder.	24
The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn.	16
Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance.	13
Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a resting-state fMRI study.	18
Network asymmetry of motor areas revealed by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.	12
Detection of signal synchronizations in resting-state fMRI datasets.	6
Preoperative localization of the sensorimotor area using independent component analysis of resting-state fMRI.	9
Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity.	9
Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex.	14
Resting state networks in human cervical spinal cord observed with fMRI.	5
Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging of resting-state cerebral blood flow in preclinical Huntington's disease.	1
Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal.	10
Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine for disease state prediction using resting state functional and effective brain connectivity.	8
Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity.	5
Reciprocal effects of antidepressant treatment on activity and connectivity of the mood regulating circuit: an FMRI study.	12
Resting state networks change in clinically isolated syndrome.	18
A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex.	11
Network anticorrelations, global regression, and phase-shifted soft tissue correction.	32
Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study.	28
Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter integrity in children.	26
Periods of rest in fMRI contain individual spontaneous events which are related to slowly fluctuating spontaneous activity.	28
Developmental maturation of dynamic causal control signals in higher-order cognition: a neurocognitive network model.	13
Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network.	23
Resting-state spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity: a new paradigm for presurgical planning using fMRI.	23
Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder.	14
Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of posterior cingulate cortex in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.	17
Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease.	32
Frequency based mutual information measures between clusters of brain regions in functional magnetic resonance imaging.	6
The resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting state.	11
Alterations in default network connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder related to early-life trauma.	18
Default network connectivity during a working memory task.	21
Face-Specific Resting Functional Connectivity between the Fusiform Gyrus and Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus.	16
Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control.	19
The association between resting functional connectivity and creativity.	14
Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.	96
Cognitive state and connectivity effects of the genome-wide significant psychosis variant in ZNF804A.	18
Functional connectivity estimation in fMRI data: influence of preprocessing and time course selection.	5
Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity.	25
Blood oxygenation level dependent contrast resting state networks are relevant to functional activity in the neocortical sensorimotor system.	2
Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.	3
Thalamic resting-state functional networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury.	13
Resting-state functional connectivity of the rat brain.	15
Changes in thalamus connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI.	20
Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain.	28
Loss of coherence of low frequency fluctuations of BOLD fMRI in visual cortex of healthy aged subjects.	11
Graph theoretical analysis of functional brain networks: test-retest evaluation on short- and long-term resting-state functional MRI data.	40
Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 T study.	9
Baseline BOLD correlation predicts individuals' stimulus-evoked BOLD responses.	19
SSRI administration reduces resting state functional connectivity in dorso-medial prefrontal cortex.	0
Altered functional connectivity in default mode network in absence epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.	23
Resting state corticolimbic connectivity abnormalities in unmedicated bipolar disorder and unipolar depression.	20
Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI.	21
Long-term motor training induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow in both task and resting states.	9
Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks.	7
Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and singular value decomposition.	7
Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions.	14
Apathy, depression, and motor symptoms have distinct and separable resting activity patterns in idiopathic Parkinson disease.	7
Changes in the interaction of resting-state neural networks from adolescence to adulthood.	16
Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia.	25
Brain correlates of hypnotic paralysis-a resting-state fMRI study.	24
Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.	22
Joint amplitude and connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson's disease.	4
Randomness of resting-state brain oscillations encodes Gray's personality trait.	7
Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area.	10
Dysconnectivity of multiple resting-state networks in patients with schizophrenia who have persistent auditory verbal hallucinations.	13
Network scaling effects in graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data.	35
Energy-based stochastic control of neural mass models suggests time-varying effective connectivity in the resting state.	0
Toward discovery science of human brain function.	37
Never resting brain: simultaneous representation of two alpha related processes in humans.	8
A novel model-free data analysis technique based on clustering in a mutual information space: application to resting-state FMRI.	18
The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks.	34
Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia.	16
Interaction between aging and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.	20
Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and pitfalls.	64
The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses.	18
Impaired cerebellar functional connectivity in schizophrenia patients and their healthy siblings.	18
Topographical functional connectivity pattern in the perisylvian language networks.	3
Restoration of mammillothalamic functional connectivity through thiamine replacement therapy in Wernicke's encephalopathy.	2
Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children.	34
Beyond acute social stress: Increased functional connectivity between amygdala and cortical midline structures.	9
Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain.	29
Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.	12
Loss of 'small-world' networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity.	13
Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms' strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex.	5
Uncovering intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks in awake rat brain.	21
Resting-state EEG source localization and functional connectivity in schizophrenia-like psychosis of epilepsy.	16
Regional contraction of brain surface area involves three large-scale networks in schizophrenia.	8
A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks.	10
Reduced hippocampal activity during encoding in cognitively normal adults carrying the APOE ɛ4 allele.	4
Resting network plasticity following brain injury.	13
Changes in resting connectivity during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury.	31
Noise during rest enables the exploration of the brain's dynamic repertoire.	13
Cognitive and default-mode resting state networks: do male and female brains "rest" differently?	14
Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and intra-individual variation in working memory capacity.	10
Fundamentals of electroencefalography, magnetoencefalography, and functional magnetic resonance imaging.	0
Functional connectivity MR imaging of the language network in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy.	9
Brain connectivity during resting state and subsequent working memory task predicts behavioural performance.	20
Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity.	5
Increased neural resources recruitment in the intrinsic organization in major depression.	19
A shift to randomness of brain oscillations in people with autism.	9
Neuroimaging technique: a diagnostic tool to detect altered states of consciousness.	4
Low frequency fluctuations reveal integrated and segregated processing among the cerebral hemispheres.	35
Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging resting-state connectivity in periaqueductal gray networks in migraine.	4
Personality traits and the amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency oscillations during resting state.	5
Altered small-world brain functional networks and duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.	6
Modulation of default-mode network activity by acute tryptophan depletion is associated with mood change: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	10
Striatal functional connectivity networks are modulated by fMRI resting state conditions.	22
Low-frequency BOLD fluctuations demonstrate altered thalamocortical connectivity in schizophrenia.	13
Resting-state brain networks: literature review and clinical applications.	43
Dimensional brain-behavior relationships in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.	15
Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level analyses in resting-state fMRI.	12
Emerging imaging tools for use with traumatic brain injury research.	3
Differential temporo-parietal cortical networks that support relational and item-based recency judgments.	2
Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.	62
Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity.	14
Reliability analysis of the resting state can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of Parkinson disease.	10
Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain oscillations in functional MRI.	5
Effects of training of processing speed on neural systems.	1
fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.	8
Resting-state networks in awake five- to eight-year old children.	31
Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks.	18
Impaired perceptual networks in temporal lobe epilepsy revealed by resting fMRI.	7
Reproducibility of single-subject functional connectivity measurements.	30
Differential interictal activity of the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex revealed by resting state functional MRI at 3T in generalized vs. partial seizure.	7
Joint generative model for fMRI/DWI and its application to population studies.	6
Functional connectivity between the thalamus and visual cortex under eyes closed and eyes open conditions: a resting-state fMRI study.	20
Brain default-mode network abnormalities in hepatic encephalopathy: A resting-state functional MRI study.	11
Cocaine administration decreases functional connectivity in human primary visual and motor cortex as detected by functional MRI.	3
Depression uncouples brain hate circuit.	10
Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks.	18
Abnormal T2 relaxation time in the cerebellar vermis of adults sexually abused in childhood: potential role of the vermis in stress-enhanced risk for drug abuse.	0
Where the BOLD signal goes when alpha EEG leaves.	4
Noninvasive functional and structural connectivity mapping of the human thalamocortical system.	17
Specific somatotopic organization of functional connections of the primary motor network during resting state.	28
The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.	20
I know the pain you feel-how the human brain's default mode predicts our resonance to another's suffering.	8
Changes in the regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in minimal hepatic encephalopathy.	8
Are posterior default-mode networks more robust than anterior default-mode networks? Evidence from resting-state fMRI data analysis.	9
Default mode of brain activity demonstrated by positron emission tomography imaging in awake monkeys: higher rest-related than working memory-related activity in medial cortical areas.	9
The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state FMRI.	29
Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead.	58
Increased activity imbalance in fronto-subcortical circuits in adolescents with major depression.	13
Regional homogeneity changes in patients with Parkinson's disease.	9
Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration.	7
Modular organization of brain resting state networks in chronic back pain patients.	15
Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys.	21
Impairment and compensation coexist in amnestic MCI default mode network.	15
Automatic physiological waveform processing for FMRI noise correction and analysis.	6
Interrater and intermethod reliability of default mode network selection.	22
A resting state network in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia.	26
Intrinsically organized network for word processing during the resting state.	3
Association between functional connectivity hubs and brain networks.	18
Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain.	16
A serial functional connectivity MRI study in healthy individuals assessing the variability of connectivity measures: reduced interhemispheric connectivity in the motor network during continuous performance.	17
Frequency specificity of functional connectivity in brain networks.	22
Neural Encoding of Objects Relevant for Navigation and Resting State Correlations with Navigational Ability.	5
Causes and consequences of cerebral small vessel disease. The RUN DMC study: a prospective cohort study. Study rationale and protocol.	1
Principles of magnetic resonance assessment of brain function.	4
Lifelong bilingualism maintains white matter integrity in older adults.	2
The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity.	19
Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.	13
Combining graph and machine learning methods to analyze differences in functional connectivity across sex.	17
Altered function and connectivity of the medial frontal cortex in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder.	16
Reduced prefrontal functional connectivity in the default mode network is related to greater psychopathology in subjects with high genetic loading for schizophrenia.	8
Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally sleeping infants.	12
Emotional experience modulates brain activity during fixation periods between tasks.	11
Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking.	7
Evaluating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.	19
Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation.	24
The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain.	12
Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study.	3
Task-induced deactivation and the "resting" state.	6
Altered self-referential network in resting-state amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.	48
Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state.	3
A weighted-RV method to detect fine-scale functional connectivity during resting state.	15
Decreased regional homogeneity in insula and cerebellum: a resting-state fMRI study in patients with major depression and subjects at high risk for major depression.	11
The utility of near-infrared spectroscopy in the regression of low-frequency physiological noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging data.	7
Group independent component analysis reveals consistent resting-state networks across multiple sessions.	25
Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations.	4
Detection and scaling of task-induced fMRI-BOLD response using resting state fluctuations.	1
Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging approach.	3
Subspace-based Identification Algorithm for characterizing causal networks in resting brain.	18
Non-invasive electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study.	5
Differential relationships between transcallosal structural and functional connectivity in young and older adults.	4
Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline.	4
The nature of brain dysfunction in autism: functional brain imaging studies.	9
Structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus and resting state functional connectivity of the ventral prefrontal cortex in late life depression.	6
Resting-State Brain Activity in Schizophrenia and Major Depression: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis.	14
Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study.	16
Graph-based network analysis of resting-state functional MRI.	69
ICA-fNORM: spatial normalization of fMRI data using intrinsic group-ICA networks.	11
Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging.	1
Changes in resting neural connectivity during propofol sedation.	20
Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer's disease: beyond the default mode network.	24
Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self.	13
Effects of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on human regional cerebral blood flow.	0
Modulating cortico-striatal and thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation.	11
Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture.	32
fMRI study of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy using amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation analysis.	10
Investigation of long-term reproducibility of intrinsic connectivity network mapping: A resting-state fMRI study.	30
Granger causality analysis implementation on MATLAB: A graphic user interface toolkit for fMRI data processing.	14
Recent developments of functional magnetic resonance imaging research for drug development in Alzheimer's disease.	33
Brain plasticity in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: evidence from resting-state fMRI.	9
Default network correlations analyzed on native surfaces.	29
Higher-order contrast functions improve performance of independent component analysis of fMRI data.	3
Disruption of functional connectivity in clinically normal older adults harboring amyloid burden.	18
Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome.	43
Fractional Gaussian noise, functional MRI and Alzheimer's disease.	1
Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study.	13
Functional connectivity in the default network during resting state is preserved in a vegetative but not in a brain dead patient.	13
Altered networks in bothersome tinnitus: a functional connectivity study.	17
Altered regional homogeneity in motor cortices in patients with multiple system atrophy.	9
Frequency-specific functional connectivity in the brain during resting state revealed by NIRS.	13
Electrical brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task-specific activation.	9
Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical-cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers.	17
Alteration of resting brain function by genetic variation in angiotensin converting enzyme in amnestic-type mild cognitive impairment of Chinese Han.	4
Instantaneous and causal connectivity in resting state brain networks derived from functional MRI data.	17
Whole brain resting-state analysis reveals decreased functional connectivity in major depression.	22
A dual-networks architecture of top-down control.	10
Reactivity of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity to different states of alpha synchrony: a concurrent EEG-fMRI study.	19
Corticosteroid induced decoupling of the amygdala in men.	8
Amplitude of low-frequency oscillations in schizophrenia: a resting state fMRI study.	23
A study of the brain's resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.	11
Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study.	9
Functionally specific changes in resting-state sensorimotor networks after motor learning.	5
Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after working memory training.	26
Amplitude low-frequency oscillation abnormalities in the heroin users: a resting state fMRI study.	19
Resting functional connectivity in patients with brain tumors in eloquent areas.	3
Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation.	16
Impact of visual repetition rate on intrinsic properties of low frequency fluctuations in the visual network.	9
Predicting decisions in human social interactions using real-time fMRI and pattern classification.	1
A whole-brain voxel based measure of intrinsic connectivity contrast reveals local changes in tissue connectivity with anesthetic without a priori assumptions on thresholds or regions of interest.	12
Functional connectivity between ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala at low frequency in the resting state in bipolar disorder.	14
Brain activation during autobiographical memory retrieval with special reference to default mode network.	8
The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions.	3
Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI.	37
Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease.	16
Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.	56
Assessing functional connectivity in the human brain by fMRI.	26
A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI.	10
Fractal analysis of spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal in rat brain.	14
Caffeine reduces resting-state BOLD functional connectivity in the motor cortex.	18
Multimodal and Multi-tissue Measures of Connectivity Revealed by Joint Independent Component Analysis.	9
Resting-state networks in the macaque at 7T.	27
Alterations in regional homogeneity of baseline brain activity in pediatric temporal lobe epilepsy.	16
Baseline and longitudinal patterns of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI.	22
Abnormal connectivity between attentional, language and auditory networks in schizophrenia.	10
Watching the fetal brain at 'rest'.	24
Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism spectrum disorders.	18
Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex.	13
Topographic maps of multisensory attention.	20
Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease.	27
Structural and functional neuronal connectivity in Alzheimer's disease	7
Neural intrinsic connectivity networks associated with risk aversion in old age.	6
Regional homogeneity changes in social anxiety disorder: A resting-state fMRI study.	23
Spatial nonuniformity of the resting CBF and BOLD responses to sevoflurane: in vivo study of normal human subjects with magnetic resonance imaging.	2
Dissociated emergent-response system and fine-processing system in human neural network and a heuristic neural architecture for autonomous humanoid robots.	13
Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.	18
Correspondence between altered functional and structural connectivity in the contralesional sensorimotor cortex after unilateral stroke in rats: a combined resting-state functional MRI and manganese-enhanced MRI study.	6
Functional integration in schizophrenia: too little or too much? Preliminary results on fMRI data.	1
Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis.	12
Slow vasomotor fluctuation in fMRI of anesthetized child brain.	1
Negative edges and soft thresholding in complex network analysis of resting state functional connectivity data.	38
Characterizing dynamic functional connectivity in the resting brain using variable parameter regression and Kalman filtering approaches.	36
Analysis of EEG-fMRI data in focal epilepsy based on automated spike classification and Signal Space Projection.	0
Resting in peace or noise: scanner background noise suppresses default-mode network.	13
Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in the brain from resting-state fMRI data.	24
Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain.	21
Mammillothalamic functional connectivity and memory function in Wernicke's encephalopathy.	6
Comparison of characteristics between region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.	10
Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.	40
Reduced caudate volume and enhanced striatal-DMN integration in chess experts.	12
Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.	7
Effects of aging on default mode network activity in resting state fMRI: does the method of analysis matter?	16
Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the default mode network in resting state.	6
Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.	22
Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network	13
Undirected thought: Neural determinants and correlates.	3
DPARSF: A MATLAB toolbox for "Pipeline" data analysis of resting state fMRI.	29
The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: are anti-correlated networks introduced?	20
The oscillating brain: complex and reliable.	50
Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain: comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse.	30
Depression, rumination and the default network.	4
Breakdown in the brain network subserving moral judgment in criminal psychopathy.	5
Subcortical functional connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly--a resting state fMRI study.	24
The non-separability of physiologic noise in functional connectivity MRI with spatial ICA at 3T.	11
TE-dependent spatial and spectral specificity of functional connectivity.	30
Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.	24
Anatomical differences and network characteristics underlying smoking cue reactivity.	12
Differential age effects on cerebral blood flow and BOLD response to encoding: associations with cognition and stroke risk.	2
Orbitofrontal connectivity with resting-state networks is associated with midbrain dopamine D3 receptor availability.	18
Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in Psychopathology.	72
Bimanual passive movement: functional activation and inter-regional coupling.	9
Alteration of brain default network in subacute phase of injury in concussed individuals: Resting-state fMRI study.	16
Neuronal dysfunction and disconnection of cortical hubs in non-demented subjects with elevated amyloid burden.	15
Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating circuit: an FMRI study.	6
Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.	2
Neuronal networks in children with continuous spikes and waves during slow sleep.	7
Multimodal analysis of resting state cortical activity: what does fMRI add to our knowledge of microstates in resting state EEG activity? Commentary to the papers by Britz et al. and Musso et al. in the current issue of NeuroImage.	5
Brain resting state is disrupted in chronic back pain patients.	20
Reduced precuneus deactivation during object naming in patients with mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.	7
Fractionating the default mode network: distinct contributions of the ventral and dorsal posterior cingulate cortex to cognitive control.	11
Functional connectivity MRI in infants: exploration of the functional organization of the developing brain.	64
On the relationship between seed-based and ICA-based measures of functional connectivity.	18
Robust reproducible resting state networks in the awake rodent brain.	32
Cerebral blood flow and BOLD responses to a memory encoding task: a comparison between healthy young and elderly adults.	0
Understanding the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Mini Review on fMRI and ERP Studies.	25
BOLD and perfusion changes during epileptic generalised spike wave activity.	3
Functional connectivity-based identification of subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus using multilevel independent component analysis of resting state fMRI.	26
Modulatory effects of acupuncture on resting-state networks: A functional MRI study combining independent component analysis and multivariate granger causality analysis.	8
Aberrant connectivity of resting-state networks in borderline personality disorder.	12
Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts connectivity between subgenual cingulate and salience network during rest in adolescents.	9
Functional connectivity in fronto-subcortical circuitry during the resting state in obsessive-compulsive disorder.	7
Altered small-world brain functional networks in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.	17
The intrinsic functional organization of the brain is altered in autism.	16
Central nervous system dysregulation extends beyond the pain-matrix network in cluster headache.	7
Reduced interhemispheric resting state functional connectivity in cocaine addiction.	24
Multimodal imaging of recovery of functional networks associated with reversal of paradoxical herniation after cranioplasty.	13
Task-induced deactivation of midline cortical regions in schizophrenia assessed with fMRI.	4
Spatially extended FMRI signal response to stimulus in non-functionally relevant regions of the human brain: preliminary results.	2
Brain imaging of the self--conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues.	6
How default is the default mode of brain function? Further evidence from intrinsic BOLD signal fluctuations.	13
Altered effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state FMRI study.	21
Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity.	21
Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity.	6
A comparison of five fMRI protocols for mapping speech comprehension systems.	2
Functional connectivity of the posteromedial cortex.	33
Resting state activity in patients with disorders of consciousness.	25
Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest.	11
Retrosplenial cortex connectivity in schizophrenia.	14
Corticostriatal functional connectivity in non-medicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder.	11
Regional brain atrophy and functional disconnection across Alzheimer's disease evolution.	8
Acupuncture modulates spontaneous activities in the anticorrelated resting brain networks.	8
Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans.	15
MRI assessment of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in rat brains with acute cerebral ischemic stroke.	19
A method for evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia.	10
Motor network degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a structural and functional connectivity study.	20
Enhanced resting-state brain activities in ADHD patients: a fMRI study.	9
Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correlations.	15
Reduced interhemispheric functional connectivity in the motor cortex during rest in limb-onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.	18
Abnormal functional connectivity of default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients.	23
Amygdalofrontal functional disconnectivity and aggression in schizophrenia.	19
Modulating spontaneous brain activity using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.	14
Gender-related differences in functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis.	5
Altered connectivity pattern of hubs in default-mode network with Alzheimer's disease: an granger causality modeling approach.	25
Is the ADHD brain wired differently? A review on structural and functional connectivity in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.	21
Resting-state functional connectivity in animal models: modulations by exsanguination.	4
Spontaneous brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach to explore resting-state networks.	12
Physiological denoising of BOLD fMRI data using Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe) processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS).	6
Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.	27
Spatial patterns of intrinsic brain activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state functional MRI study.	31
Functional connectivity during resting-state functional MR imaging: Study of the correspondence between independent component analysis and region-of-interest-based methods.	19
Reduced resting-state functional connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder.	15
Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders.	11
Multiple sclerosis: low-frequency temporal blood oxygen level-dependent fluctuations indicate reduced functional connectivity initial results.	2
Aberrant striatal functional connectivity in children with autism.	23
Fronto-temporal spontaneous resting state functional connectivity in pediatric bipolar disorder.	20
Impaired resting-state functional integrations within default mode network of generalized tonic-clonic seizures epilepsy.	19
Microstructural and functional connectivity in the developing preterm brain.	11
Resting-state neural activity across face-selective cortical regions Is behaviorally relevant.	11
Brain dynamics during natural viewing conditions--a new guide for mapping connectivity in vivo.	7
Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy.	9
Regional homogeneity of the resting-state brain activity correlates with individual intelligence.	12
Longitudinal changes of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke.	14
Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI.	25
The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain.	16
Altered gray matter morphometry and resting-state functional and structural connectivity in social anxiety disorder.	10
Radial correlation contrast--a functional connectivity MRI contrast to map changes in local neuronal communication.	6
Three systems of insular functional connectivity identified with cluster analysis.	18
Temporal clustering analysis: what does it tell us about the resting state of the brain?	21
Episodic memory retrieval, parietal cortex, and the default mode network: functional and topographic analyses.	11
Neuronal correlates of "free will" are associated with regional specialization in the human intrinsic/default network.	8
Spontaneous blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signal is modulated by behavioral state and correlates with evoked response in sensorimotor cortex: A 7.0-T fMRI study.	13
Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network.	7
Resting-state fMRI can reliably map neural networks in children.	29
Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.	5
Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury.	15
Influence of functional connectivity and structural MRI measures on episodic memory.	9
Specifically progressive deficits of brain functional marker in amnestic type mild cognitive impairment.	33
Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study.	15
Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI.	43
Unbiased group-wise image registration: applications in brain fiber tract atlas construction and functional connectivity analysis.	1
Disrupted regional homogeneity in treatment-resistant depression: a resting-state fMRI study.	11
Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data.	89
Reorganizing the Intrinsic Functional Architecture of the Human Primary Motor Cortex during Rest with Non-Invasive Cortical Stimulation.	7
Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.	9
Sources of systematic bias in hypercapnia-calibrated functional MRI estimation of oxygen metabolism.	0
Long-term effects of motor training on resting-state networks and underlying brain structure.	11
The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.	25
Data-driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems.	18
Resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain revealed with diffuse optical tomography.	17
Attenuated brain response to auditory word stimulation with sevoflurane: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in humans.	2
Methods of the pharmacological imaging of the cannabinoid system (PhICS) study: towards understanding the role of the brain endocannabinoid system in human cognition.	1
L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.	28
An anterior-to-posterior shift in midline cortical activity in schizophrenia during self-reflection.	8
The influence of carbon dioxide on brain activity and metabolism in conscious humans.	8
Functional connectivity in the rat at 11.7T: Impact of physiological noise in resting state fMRI.	16
Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence from resting state fMRI.	11
Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization.	9
Altered topological properties of functional network connectivity in schizophrenia during resting State: A small-world brain network study.	31
Altered amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in post-traumatic stress disorder.	12
The balance between feeling and knowing: affective and cognitive empathy are reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional dynamics.	16
Task-dependent organization of brain regions active during rest.	19
Abnormal small-world architecture of top-down control networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder.	18
Imaging of functional connectivity in the mouse brain.	26
Spontaneous brain activity in the default mode network is sensitive to different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive load.	34
A multiscale analysis of the temporal characteristics of resting-state fMRI data.	2
Network discovery with DCM.	8
Negative BOLD-fMRI signals in large cerebral veins.	10
Potential pitfall of reduced cerebral perfusion in clinical resting state functional MR imaging.	2
The Anatomical Distance of Functional Connections Predicts Brain Network Topology in Health and Schizophrenia.	13
Altered resting-state functional connectivity of thalamus in earthquake-induced posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	13
Inter-hemispheric functional connectivity disruption in children with prenatal alcohol exposure.	15
Impaired attention network in temporal lobe epilepsy: a resting FMRI study.	14
Functional connectivity of the human rostral and caudal cingulate motor areas in the brain resting state at 3T.	1
Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network.	13
Frontal regional homogeneity increased and temporal regional homogeneity decreased after remission of first-episode drug-na\"{\i}ve major depressive disorder with panic disorder patients under duloxetine therapy for 6weeks.	7
Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly.	7
A selective review of simulated driving studies: Combining naturalistic and hybrid paradigms, analysis approaches, and future directions.	8
Regional variation in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic fluctuations.	22
Mind wandering and attention during focused meditation: a fine-grained temporal analysis of fluctuating cognitive states.	7
Gray matter deficits and resting-state abnormalities in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.	9
Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations.	21
Partitioning networks into clusters and residuals with average association.	0
Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach.	52
Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic functional connectivity in the default mode network: an inter-subject analysis.	23
Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks.	15
A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state functional connectivity.	11
Motor "dexterity"?: Evidence that left hemisphere lateralization of motor circuit connectivity is associated with better motor performance in children.	6
Resting state functional connectivity of the whole head with near-infrared spectroscopy.	22
Transient alcohol craving suppression by rTMS of dorsal anterior cingulate: an fMRI and LORETA EEG study.	1
Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex.	26
Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks.	17
Fully exploratory network ICA (FENICA) on resting-state fMRI data.	28
Sex-related differences in amygdala functional connectivity during resting conditions.	0
Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study.	7
Neural correlates of the interactive relationship between memory deficits and depressive symptoms in nondemented elderly: resting fMRI study.	16
Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder.	22
Modular Organization of Functional Network Connectivity in Healthy Controls and Patients with Schizophrenia during the Resting State.	24
Increased cortico-subcortical functional connectivity in schizophrenia.	0
Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks.	4
Normal aging decreases regional homogeneity of the motor areas in the resting state.	8
Hyperactive putamen in patients with paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	8
The selectivity and functional connectivity of the anterior temporal lobes.	2
Structural and functional hippocampal changes in multiple sclerosis patients with intact memory function.	5
Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability	20
Abnormal default-mode network in angiotensin converting enzyme D allele carriers with remitted geriatric depression.	11
Alterations of resting state functional connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.	24
Motor pathway injury in patients with periventricular leucomalacia and spastic diplegia.	2
Endogenous cortisol is associated with functional connectivity between the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex.	3
Intrinsic functional connectivity of the periaqueductal gray, a resting fMRI study.	18
Acupuncture modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks.	13
Premotor functional connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders.	16
Long-term vascular access ports as a means of sedative administration in a rodent fMRI survival model.	4
Recency effects in the inferior parietal lobe during verbal recognition memory.	4
Functional brain imaging in 14 patients with dissociative amnesia reveals right inferolateral prefrontal hypometabolism.	0
Self-similar correlation function in brain resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging.	17
Functional anatomy of cortical areas characterized by Von Economo neurons.	15
Regional homogeneity changes in patients with neuromyelitis optica revealed by resting-state functional MRI.	6
Abnormal baseline brain activity in posttraumatic stress disorder: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	7
The relationship within and between the extrinsic and intrinsic systems indicated by resting state correlational patterns of sensory cortices.	14
Characterization of neuromagnetic brain rhythms over time scales of minutes using spatial independent component analysis.	8
EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics.	10
Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.	23
Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns.	1
Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load.	24
Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia.	16
Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.	18
Spontaneous low-frequency blood oxygenation level-dependent fluctuations and functional connectivity analysis of the 'resting' brain.	57
Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization.	92
Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis.	8
Default mode of brain function in monkeys.	7
Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat.	27
Localization of cerebral functional deficits in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study.	16
Robust Feature Selection in Resting-State fMRI Connectivity Based on Population Studies.	10
Task demand modulation of steady-state functional connectivity to primary motor cortex.	11
Research progress on resting state fMRI of epilepsy.	11
Can resting-state functional MRI serve as a complement to task-based mapping of sensorimotor function? A test-retest reliability study in healthy volunteers.	18
fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep.	6
Integrating functional and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging for analysis of structure-function relationship in the human language network.	15
MRI magnetic field stimulates rotational sensors of the brain.	0
Regional homogeneity, functional connectivity and imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease: a review of resting-state fMRI studies.	39
Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI.	10
"Thinking about not-thinking": neural correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation.	13
Pharmacological modulation of functional connectivity: $\alpha$(2)-adrenergic receptor agonist alters synchrony but not neural activation.	29
Spatio-temporal characteristics of low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in isoflurane-anesthetized rat brain.	8
Neural correlates of a single-session massage treatment.	14
Default-mode and task-positive network activity in major depressive disorder: implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination.	4
Functional connectivity for somatosensory and motor cortex in spastic diplegia.	17
Functional connectivity of the frontal eye fields in humans and macaque monkeys investigated with resting-state fMRI.	18
Alterations of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in treatment-resistant and treatment-response depression: A resting-state fMRI study.	32
Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.	11
Emotional faces and the default mode network.	10
Hypnotic induction decreases anterior default mode activity.	3
The influence of rest period instructions on the default mode network.	28
Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression.	29
Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults.	16
A combined neuropsychological and brain imaging study of obstructive sleep apnea.	2
Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional homotopy.	31
Genetic modulation of neural response during working memory in healthy individuals: interaction of glucocorticoid receptor and dopaminergic genes.	4
The effect of sensorimotor activation on functional connectivity mapping with MRI.	7
Interpreting functional imaging studies in terms of neurotransmitter cycling.	1
Beyond superior temporal cortex: intersubject correlations in narrative speech comprehension.	3
Oxidative glucose metabolism in rat brain during single forepaw stimulation: a spatially localized 1H[13C] nuclear magnetic resonance study.	0
Setting the frame: the human brain activates a basic low-frequency network for language processing.	12
Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks.	12
Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI of the human brain.	10
Deactivation of the default mode network as a marker of impaired consciousness: an FMRI study.	18
Spontaneous activity associated with primary visual cortex: a resting-state FMRI study.	8
Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI.	6
Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness.	23
EEG-vigilance and BOLD effect during simultaneous EEG/fMRI measurement.	16
Variable global dysconnectivity and individual differences in schizophrenia.	9
Identification of hyperactive intrinsic amygdala network connectivity associated with impulsivity in abstinent heroin addicts.	11
An energy budget for the olfactory glomerulus.	0
Functional network disruption in the degenerative dementias.	36
Distributed changes in default-mode resting-state connectivity in multiple sclerosis.	16
Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity.	12
A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia.	18
Disrupted thalamocortical connectivity in PSP: A resting-state fMRI, DTI, and VBM study.	8
Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.	23
Functional connectivity of the amygdala in early-childhood-onset depression.	9
Extra-visual functional and structural connection abnormalities in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy.	7
Task-induced deactivation from rest extends beyond the default mode brain network.	18
Altered functional connectivity of primary visual cortex in early blindness.	13
Age and cholinergic effects on hemodynamics and functional coherence of human hippocampus.	4
Dynamic changes in brain activations and functional connectivity during affectively different tactile stimuli.	1
Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state functional connectivity in the human brain.	20
Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for neuroimaging.	2
Chronic and treatment-resistant depression: a study using arterial spin labeling perfusion MRI at 3Tesla.	1
Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence.	11
Predicting BOLD signal changes as a function of blood volume fraction and resolution.	0
Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI activity.	28
Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI.	10
Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain.	33
Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI.	24
Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and contralateral compensatory mechanisms.	7
Investigating neural primacy in Major Depressive Disorder: multivariate Granger causality analysis of resting-state fMRI time-series data.	5
Widespread functional connectivity and fMRI fluctuations in human visual cortex in the absence of visual stimulation.	10
Default network connectivity reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients.	25
Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages.	12
Emerging concepts for the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.	21
Amplitude of low frequency fluctuation within visual areas revealed by resting-state functional MRI.	17
Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in schizophrenia: effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations.	11
Regional homogeneity of resting state fMRI signals predicts Stop signal task performance.	24
Mapping resting-state functional connectivity using perfusion MRI.	17
Default mode network dysfunction in adults with prenatal alcohol exposure.	19
Mapping functional connectivity based on synchronized CMRO2 fluctuations during the resting state.	20
A new approach to estimating the signal dimension of concatenated resting-state functional MRI data sets.	12
Altered functional connectivity between the insula and the cingulate cortex in patients with Temporomandibular Disorder: A pilot study.	3
Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum.	13
Nicotine replacement in abstinent smokers improves cognitive withdrawal symptoms with modulation of resting brain network dynamics.	25
Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity.	21
Endogenous brain oscillations and related networks detected by surface EEG-combined fMRI.	11
Sustained activity within the default mode network during an implicit memory task.	10
Functional connectivity in cortical regions in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease.	21
Extracting information from functional connectivity maps via function-on-scalar regression.	19
White matter cerebral blood flow is inversely correlated with structural and functional connectivity in the human brain.	10
Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy.	12
Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal.	12
Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.	21
Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated networks: A resting-state fMRI study.	18
Depression recognition using resting-state and event-related fMRI signals.	5
Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson's disease.	14
EEG-BOLD correlations during (post-)adolescent brain maturation.	18
A software tool for interactive exploration of intrinsic functional connectivity opens new perspectives for brain surgery.	16
The temporal-spatial encoding of acupuncture effects in the brain.	16
Tissue specificity of nonlinear dynamics in baseline fMRI.	4
Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.	9
Resting-state FMRI and developmental systems neuroscience.	13
Neuroimaging of cortical development and brain connectivity in human newborns and animal models.	5
Cortical and thalamic resting-state functional connectivity is altered in childhood absence epilepsy.	14
Resting oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex.	4
Increased functional connectivity indicates the severity of cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis.	19
Integration of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.	6
Resting-state functional connectivity differences in premature children.	23
Alcohol increases spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations in the visual network.	20
Association of cerebral deficits with clinical symptoms in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia: an optimized voxel-based morphometry and resting state functional connectivity study.	5
Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data.	3
Regional homogeneity changes in heroin-dependent individuals: resting-state functional MR imaging study.	9
Changes in functional connectivity of ventral anterior cingulate cortex in heroin abusers.	6
Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans.	30
Social fearfulness in the human brain.	5
When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance.	8
Schizophrenic patients and their unaffected siblings share increased resting-state connectivity in the task-negative network but not Its anticorrelated task-positive network.	18
Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term.	26
Overall brain connectivity maps show cortico-subcortical abnormalities in schizophrenia.	16
Involvement of glutamate in rest-stimulus interaction between perigenual and supragenual anterior cingulate cortex: A combined fMRI-MRS study.	11
Default-mode-like network activation in awake rodents.	19
A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs.	6
Utility of functional MRI in pediatric neurology.	10
State-dependent functional connectivity of rat olfactory system assessed by fMRI.	7
Components of variance in a multicentre functional MRI study and implications for calculation of statistical power.	2
Neural basis of the association between depressive symptoms and memory deficits in nondemented subjects: resting-state fMRI study.	18
Abnormal regional spontaneous neural activity in treatment-refractory depression revealed by resting-state fMRI.	11
Increased default mode network connectivity associated with meditation.	3
FMRI connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network.	7
Determining significant connectivity by 4D spatiotemporal wavelet packet resampling of functional neuroimaging data.	6
Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic neuropathic pain.	11
Sleep deprivation reduces default mode network connectivity and anti-correlation during rest and task performance.	16
Impact of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting state: a wavelet correlation approach.	16
Frontal-to-parietal top-down causal streams along the dorsal attention network exclusively mediate voluntary orienting of attention.	3
The maturing architecture of the brain's default network.	20
The effect of model order selection in group PICA.	14
Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion.	8
Detecting low-frequency functional connectivity in fMRI using a self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm.	6
Altered spontaneous neuronal activity of the default-mode network in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.	18
Increased regional homogeneity in internet addiction disorder: a resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	6
Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal.	16
Task-related effects on the temporal and spatial dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in the default network.	34
An improved approach to detection of amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: fractional ALFF.	25
Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition.	14
Self-face recognition activates a frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI study.	4
Increasing measurement accuracy of age-related BOLD signal change: minimizing vascular contributions by resting-state-fluctuation-of-amplitude scaling.	3
Altered spontaneous activity in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment revealed by Regional Homogeneity.	24
Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI.	8
A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity.	17
Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI Resting State Networks.	22
Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.	7
Adolescent resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression.	26
High-field MRI reveals an acute impact on brain function in survivors of the magnitude 8.0 earthquake in China.	16
Abnormal neural activity in the patients with remitted geriatric depression: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	4
GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI.	5
Interhemispheric neuroplasticity following limb deafferentation detected by resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).	21
I remember you: A role for memory in social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their interaction.	6
Cortico-striatal connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study.	14
Analysis of functional networks involved in motor execution and motor imagery using combined hierarchical clustering analysis and independent component analysis.	13
Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate aftermath of acute psychological stress.	1
Altered engagement of attention and default networks during target detection in schizophrenia.	7
Whole brain functional connectivity in the early blind.	9
Pseudo-continuous transfer insensitive labeling technique.	0
Resting-state fMRI changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment.	26
Efficiency and cost of economical brain functional networks.	11
The default mode network integrity in patients with Parkinson's disease is levodopa equivalent dose-dependent.	15
Functional brain networks in schizophrenia: a review.	36
Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD.	15
Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity.	21
Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.	18
Detecting overlapped functional clusters in resting state fMRI with Connected Iterative Scan: a graph theory based clustering algorithm.	21
Psychogenic amnesia and self-identity: a multimodal functional investigation.	1
Changes occur in resting state network of motor system during 4 weeks of motor skill learning.	30
Structural and functional neuroimaging studies of the suicidal brain.	0
Defining neurocognitive networks in the BOLD new world of computed connectivity.	0
BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat.	18
Ising-like dynamics in large-scale functional brain networks.	6
Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus.	12
Coupling between spontaneous (resting state) fMRI fluctuations and human oculo-motor activity.	12
Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state.	28
Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants.	27
Dissociating mental states related to doing nothing by means of fMRI pattern classification.	4
Impact of working memory load on FMRI resting state pattern in subsequent resting phases.	29
Resting-state networks in the infant brain.	22
Role of the anterior insula in task-level control and focal attention.	6
Resting state sensorimotor functional connectivity in multiple sclerosis inversely correlates with transcallosal motor pathway transverse diffusivity.	9
Interregional brain interactions in children with unilateral hearing loss.	6
Increased "default mode" activity in adolescents prenatally exposed to cocaine.	10
Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images.	3
Development of the Brain's Default Mode Network from Wakefulness to Slow Wave Sleep.	24
Linking generalized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures.	2
Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children.	22
Aberrant hippocampal subregion networks associated with the classifications of aMCI subjects: A longitudinal resting-state study.	10
Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates revealed by functional connectivity.	18
Changes in regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in the cholinergic pathway associated with cognitive performance in subjects with mild Alzheimer's disease after 12-week donepezil treatment.	14
Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability.	4
Resting state default-mode network connectivity in early depression using a seed region-of-interest analysis: decreased connectivity with caudate nucleus.	15
Differential activity of subgenual cingulate and brainstem in panic disorder and PTSD.	0
Short-term effects of antipsychotic treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia revealed by "resting state" functional magnetic resonance imaging.	19
Novel approaches to imaging epilepsy by MRI.	13
Differential involvement of striato- and cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathways in tremor- and akinetic/rigid-predominant Parkinson's disease.	3
Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations.	12
From EEG to BOLD: brain mapping and estimating transfer functions in simultaneous EEG-fMRI acquisitions.	4
Abnormal spontaneous brain activity in medication-na\"{\i}ve ADHD children: A resting state fMRI study.	8
Cerebral and functional adaptation with chronic hypoxia exposure: a multi-modal MRI study.	8
Cardiorespiratory effects on default-mode network activity as measured with fMRI.	16
Mapping resting-state brain networks in conscious animals.	28
A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies.	22
A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure.	8
BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics.	16
A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering.	16
Disrupted functional brain connectivity in partial epilepsy: a resting-state fMRI study.	34
Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort.	14
Disrupted brain connectivity networks in drug-naive, first-episode major depressive disorder.	24
The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations.	18
Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury.	18
Estimation of functional connectivity in fMRI data using stability selection-based sparse partial correlation with elastic net penalty.	11
Abnormal whole-brain functional connection in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients.	24
Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: methodology and comparison with fcMRI.	12
Resting state and task-induced deactivation: A methodological comparison in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.	29
Time lag dependent multimodal processing of concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) data suggests a global circulatory origin for low-frequency oscillation signals in human brain.	12
Defining functional SMA and pre-SMA subregions in human MFC using resting state fMRI: functional connectivity-based parcellation method.	18
Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI.	7
The obese brain: Association of body mass index and insulin sensitivity with resting state network functional connectivity.	13
Topological fractionation of resting-state networks.	41
Default-mode network dysfunction and cognitive impairment in progressive MS.	4
Functional epileptic network in left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy detected using resting fMRI.	16
Genetic control over the resting brain.	21
Disruptions of functional connectivity in the default mode network of comatose patients.	19
Altered functional and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia.	14
Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state":A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men.	23
Default mode network as revealed with multiple methods for resting-state functional MRI analysis.	14
Relationship between functional connectivity and sensory impairment: Red flag or red herring?	12
Criticality in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis.	10
Abnormal neural activities in first-episode, treatment-na\"{\i}ve, short-illness-duration, and treatment-response patients with major depressive disorder: A resting-state fMRI study.	11
Spontaneous BOLD event triggered averages for estimating functional connectivity at resting state.	19
Acupuncture mobilizes the brain's default mode and its anti-correlated network in healthy subjects.	27
A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults.	14
Combining spatial and temporal information to explore resting-state networks changes in abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.	8
Default mode network connectivity as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder symptom severity in acutely traumatized subjects.	17
The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI.	20
Plasticity of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in older adults.	20
Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin users: an fMRI study.	4
Atypical prefrontal connectivity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: pathway to disease or pathological end point?	18
Controlling the false positive rate in fuzzy clustering using randomization: application to fMRI activation detection.	0
Resting state fMRI: A personal history.	26
Simultaneous EEG/functional magnetic resonance imaging at 4 Tesla: correlates of brain activity to spontaneous alpha rhythm during relaxation.	11
Abnormal brain default-mode network functional connectivity in drug addicts.	22
Changes in cerebellar functional connectivity and anatomical connectivity in schizophrenia: A combined resting-state functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging study.	8
Investigation of acupoint specificity by multivariate granger causality analysis from functional MRI data.	3
Recovery of hippocampal network connectivity correlates with cognitive improvement in mild alzheimer's disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by resting-state fMRI.	9
Functional connectivity of dissociation in patients with psychogenic non-epileptic seizures.	1
Disruption of functional connectivity of the default-mode network in alcoholism.	18
Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.	23
Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders.	12
Test-retest reliability of resting-state connectivity network characteristics using fMRI and graph theoretical measures.	30
Differential modulation of the default mode network via serotonin-1A receptors.	25
Patterns of hemodynamic low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature of free thought during rest.	23
Increased cortical BOLD signal anticipates generalized spike and wave discharges in adolescents and adults with idiopathic generalized epilepsies.	2
Alterations in brain structure and functional connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients.	6
Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state.	13
Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	14
Functional brain networks develop from a "local to distributed" organization.	27
Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their connectivity and functional differentiation.	6
Resting-state functional connectivity assessed with two diffuse optical tomographic systems.	11
A preliminary study of functional connectivity in comorbid adolescent depression.	16
Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep.	18
Using coherence to measure regional homogeneity of resting-state FMRI signal.	24
Aging influence on functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state.	6
Brain networks subserving the extraction of sentence information and its encoding to memory.	3
Correction of low-frequency physiological noise from the resting state BOLD fMRI--Effect on ICA default mode analysis at 1.5 T.	10
An improved method for mapping cerebrovascular reserve using concurrent fMRI and near-infrared spectroscopy with Regressor Interpolation at Progressive Time Delays (RIPTiDe).	1
Partitioning of physiological noise signals in the brain with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy and fMRI.	14
Resting brain connectivity: changes during the progress of Alzheimer disease.	17
Effects of repeatability measures on results of fMRI sICA: a study on simulated and real resting-state effects.	11
Spontaneous resting-state BOLD fluctuations reveal persistent domain-specific neural networks.	12
Regions of interest for resting-state fMRI analysis determined by inter-voxel cross-correlation.	34
Advances in the application of MRI to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.	6
Changes in resting-state brain networks in writer's cramp.	21
Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood.	24
Distinct resting-state brain activities in heroin-dependent individuals.	4
Double dissociation of two cognitive control networks in patients with focal brain lesions.	15
Functional neuroanatomy of the hypnotic state.	0
Resting-state fMRI study of treatment-na\"{\i}ve temporal lobe epilepsy patients with depressive symptoms.	8
Functional connectivity mapping using the ferromagnetic Potts spin model	7
Default Mode Network in Concussed Individuals in Response to YMCA Physical Stress Test.	25
A personalized history of EEG-fMRI integration.	15
Comparison of functional MR-venography and EPI-BOLD fMRI at 1.5 T.	0
Interactions between different EEG frequency bands and their effect on alpha-fMRI correlations.	9
The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures.	10
Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood induction.	36
Your resting brain CAREs about your risky behavior.	24
Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.	19
Altered functional-structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.	34
Abnormal functional connectivity in patients with vascular cognitive impairment, no dementia: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.	12
White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing human brain.	10
Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at rest.	6
Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging.	15
Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes.	2
Exploiting the potential of three dimensional spatial wavelet analysis to explore nesting of temporal oscillations and spatial variance in simultaneous EEG-fMRI data.	4
Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity.	21
Altered local coherence in the default mode network due to sevoflurane anesthesia.	18
Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investigation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.	4
Use of fNIRS to assess resting state functional connectivity.	13
Whole brain high-resolution functional imaging at ultra high magnetic fields: an application to the analysis of resting state networks.	17
Anticorrelated resting-state functional connectivity in awake rat brain.	20
Enhanced brain correlations during rest are related to memory for recent experiences.	13
Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex.	4
Intrinsically organized network for face perception during the resting state.	9
Granger causal influence predicts BOLD activity levels in the default mode network.	20
Functional connectivity in resting-state fMRI: is linear correlation sufficient?	6
Basal functional connectivity within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on declarative memory tasks.	44
Functional segmentation of the brain cortex using high model order group PICA.	27
Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network.	20
The emergence of doing "nothing" as a viable paradigm design.	12
Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.	24
Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging of autism spectrum disorders.	6
Functional connectivity of the human red nucleus in the brain resting state at 3T.	4
Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.	39
Abnormal amygdala connectivity in patients with primary insomnia: Evidence from resting state fMRI.	2
Social network theory applied to resting-state fMRI connectivity data in the identification of epilepsy networks with iterative feature selection.	10
True associations between resting fMRI time series based on innovations.	0
Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study.	15
Abnormal baseline brain activity in patients with neuromyelitis optica: a resting-state fMRI study.	6
Quantitative BOLD: mapping of human cerebral deoxygenated blood volume and oxygen extraction fraction: default state.	2
Improving measurement of functional connectivity through decreasing partial volume effects at 7T.	5
Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity.	10
fMRI as a Measure of Cognition Related Brain Circuitry in Schizophrenia.	13
Bilateral functional asymmetry disparity in positive and negative schizophrenia revealed by resting-state fMRI.	11
Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.	18
