APA Official Actions

Consensus Report of the APA Work Group on
Neuroimaging Markers of Psychiatric Disorders
RESOURCE DOCUMENT
Michael First, M.D. - Workgroup Chair
Kelly Botteron, M.D.
Cameron Carter, M.D.
Francisco Xavier Castellanos, M.D.
Daniel P. Dickstein, M.D.
Wayne Drevets, M.D.
Kerri L. Kim, Ph.D.
Matthew F. Pescosolido
Scott Rausch, M.D.
Karen E. Seymour, Ph.D.
Yvette Sheline, M.D.
Jon-Kar Zubieta, M.D., Ph.D.
Approved by the Board of Trustees, July 2012
“The findings, opinions, and conclusions of this report do not
necessarily represent the views of the officers, trustees, or all
members of the American Psychiatric Association. Views
expressed are those of the authors of the individual chapters." - APA Operations Manual.

Background
In

May 2009, an Action paper was passed by the APA

Assembly calling for the development of an APA Position
Paper on the Clinical Application of Brain Imaging in
Psychiatry. This action paper was developed in response to
questions raised by claims being made that brain imaging
technology had already reached the point that it was useful
for making a clinical diagnosis and for helping in treatment
selection. Given the APA’s mission to educate both its
members and the public-at-large about the science and
clinical practice of psychiatry, the Workgroup was appointed under the auspices of the APA Council on Research in
January 2010 to develop an evidenced-based review of the
current state of the art of clinical utility of brain imaging for
psychiatric diagnosis and for predicting treatment
response in the following diagnostic areas: adult mood and
anxiety disorders, psychotic disorders, cognitive disorders,
substance use disorders, and childhood disorders includeing ADHD, Bipolar Disorder, Depression/Anxiety, and
Autistic Disorder. This paper begins with a general
introduction about the challenges in developing valid and
reliable biomarkers for psychiatric disorders and then
provides a comprehensive review of the current research
on brain imaging biomarkers across the various diagnostic
categories. Although there are a number of promising
results presented, by the standards proposed in the
introduction to this paper, there are currently no brain
imaging biomarkers that are currently clinically useful for
any diagnostic category in psychiatry.
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Overview of Applications of Neuroimaging in Psychiatric Disorders
The application of neuroimaging technology in psychiatric
research has revolutionized clinical neuroscience perspectives on the pathophysiology of the major psychiatric
disorders. Research using a variety of types of neuroimaging techniques has shown that these conditions are
associated with abnormalities of brain function, structure
and receptor pharmacology. These data also corroborate
the conclusions reached from genetic, endocrine, and
clinical pharmacology research involving these disorders to
suggest that under the current nosology the major
psychiatric disorders likely reflect heterogenous groups of
disorders with respect to pathophysiology and etiology.
Despite the invaluable leads that the neuroimaging
studies have provided regarding the neurobiological bases
for psychiatric disorders, they have yet to impact
significantly the diagnosis or treatment of individual
patients. In clinical medicine considerable interest has
existed in developing objective, biologically-based tests for
psychiatric illnesses. From the clinical perspective such
advances could yield important benefits such as predicting
treatment response, differentiating between related
diagnostic categories, and potentially treating at-risk
patients prophylactically to prevent neurotoxicity and
clinical deterioration.
Nevertheless, the effect size of neuroimaging and other
biological abnormalities identified to date in psychiatric
disorders has been relatively small, such that imaging
measures do not provide sufficient specificity and
sensitivity to accurately classify individual cases with
respect to the presence of a psychiatric illness. This review
focuses specifically on the potential clinical utility of
biomarkers assessed using modern neuroimaging
technologies, and the approach required to validate
imaging biomarkers for use as clinical diagnostics.
The Quest for Biomarkers in Psychiatry
Both the clinical practice of psychiatry and the development of novel therapeutics have been hindered by the lack
of biomarkers that can serve as accessible, objective
indices of the complex biological phenomena that underpin psychiatric illness. The inaccessibility of brain tissue,
the lack of knowledge about pathophysiology, and the
uncertain link between abnormal measurements on any

1

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

biological test and pathogenesis all have impeded the
development of biomarkers for psychiatric disorders. As a
result progress toward improving diagnostic capabilities
and defining or predicting treatment outcome in
psychiatry has lagged that achieved in other areas of
medicine. Thus it frequently remains difficult to establish
whether individual patients suffer from a particular
disease, how individual patients can best be treated, and
whether experimental treatments are effective in general.
The need for clinical biomarkers has become acute, as
their absence particularly has hindered research aimed at
developing novel therapeutics. Due at least partly to the
lack of well-established pathophysiological targets for new
drugs, relatively large numbers of experimental compounds are failing in increasingly expensive late-stage
clinical trials. As a result, drug development pipelines are
becoming dry, and several companies have discontinued
their research and development of pharmaceuticals for
psychiatric conditions. The ramifications of these limitations for clinical practice also are significant, as psychiatric
nosology and diagnosis largely have remained at a
standstill since the development of DSM-III, the clinical
approach to treatment decisions for individual patients
remains empirical (“trial and error”), and may patients are
inadequately helped by extant treatments.
Current Application of Neuroimaging Biomarkers in
Psychiatric Diagnosis
For over two decades imaging has maintained a wellestablished but narrow place in the diagnostic evaluation
of patients with psychiatric disease, largely because of the
usefulness of neuromorphological MRI in detecting and
characterizing structural brain abnormalities such as
lesions and atrophy. Thus the role of imaging in patients
with psychopathology historically has been limited to one
of exclusion of potentially etiological medical conditions:
namely to rule out neoplasm, hematoma, hydrocephalus,
or other potentially surgically treatable causes of psychiatric symptoms, or to detect the presence of cerebrovascular disease or gross atrophy.
Although clinically important, these conditions appear
to play a role in the pathogenesis of psychiatric symptoms
in only a small proportion of cases presenting for the
evaluation of mood, anxiety or psychotic disorders.
Increasingly a major quest of researchers has been to
identify neuroimaging results that offer diagnostic
capabilities for particular psychiatric diseases as well as for
their relevant differential diagnoses. Currently neuroimaging is not recommended within either the U.S. or the
European practice guidelines for positively defining diagnosis of any primary psychiatric disorder. Nevertheless,
advances in research applications of neuroimaging
technology have provided leads that may foreshadow
future clinical applications of imaging biomarkers for
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

establishing diagnosis and predicting illness course or
treatment outcome. The ensuing review discusses issues
that have been addressed within other areas of clinical
medicine to establish the validity and reliability of imaging
diagnostics, with the aim of providing principles to guide
the evaluation of neuroimaging applications in clinical
psychiatry.

Biomarker Definition, Validation and
Qualification
The NIH has defined a biomarker (i.e., biological marker)
as: “A characteristic that is objectively measured and
evaluated as an indicator of normal biologic processes,
pathogenic processes, or pharmacologic responses to a
therapeutic intervention.” (De Gruttola et al. 2001). A
biomarker thus can define a physiological, pathological, or
anatomical characteristic or measurement that putatively
relates to some aspect of either normal or abnormal
biological function. Biomarkers thus may assess many
different types of biological characteristics or parameters,
including receptor expression patterns, radiographic or
other imaging-based measures, or electrophysiologic
parameters.
The term "biomarker" connotes different meanings in
different contexts, based upon the intended application of
the information a biomarker provides. Within clinical
medicine, biomarkers include measures that suggest the
etiology of, susceptibility to, activity levels of, or progress of
a disease. In addition, alterations in patient-associated
biomarkers related to an intervention may be used to
predict the likelihood of experiencing a robust clinical
outcome or an adverse reaction to a treatment. Finally, in
drug development a biomarker can be any measure of drug
action that is proximal to its clinical effect, including
biomarkers that correlate with drug response or quantify
the extent to which a drug occupies specific receptors in a
target tissue.
Notably, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
recently has developed guidance that addresses multiple
types of biomarkers that can be applied to drug
development, including prognostic, predictive, pharmacodynamic, and surrogate biomarkers. A prognostic biomarker is a baseline patient or disease characteristic that
categorizes patients by degree of risk for disease
occurrence or progression. A predictive biomarker is a
baseline characteristic that categorizes patients by their
likelihood for response to a particular treatment. A
pharmacodynamic biomarker is a dynamic assessment that
shows that a biological response has occurred in a patient
after having received a therapeutic intervention. A
surrogate endpoint is defined as a biomarker intended to
substitute for a clinical efficacy endpoint. Conceivably
each of these biomarker types holds the potential to be

2

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

clinically useful in psychiatric research or practice.
Nevertheless, in its guidance the FDA identified the most
valuable role for biomarkers as their use in clinical
diagnostics.
In considering the development of neuroimaging
biomarkers as clinical diagnostics, the FDA guidance on
biomarkers for drug development merits comment.
Generally, the requirements of biomarkers for quantifycation of drug effects in research and development, which
depend upon population means with variance estimates,
converge with the requirements of diagnostics in clinical
practice, which are assessed on a per patient basis. The
common element in both is longitudinal quantification;
both analyses require baseline and follow-up effects of
treatments. For example, clinical evidence from the
National Oncologic PET Registry motivated the expanded
coverage by Medicare for FDGPET/CT in the detection and
staging of cancer and in the monitoring of cancer
treatment response. Thus as diagnostics, biomarkers are of
interest to health care providers and consumers for parallel
applications, since earlier detection of disease facilitates
earlier intervention, which, when followed by effective,
individualized treatment, can improve patient outcomes.
With respect to establishing the utility of a biomarker, it
is useful to distinguish between the terms “validation” and
“qualification”. Validation generally refers to the determination of the performance characteristics of a measurement
—for example, the measurement’s reliability, sensitivity
and specificity—in measuring a particular biological
construct. The validation process is particularly relevant
for securing regulatory approval to market techniques for
commercial use as clinical diagnostics, as described in the
subsequent section.
The term qualification refers to establishing the
credibility of a biomarker in its application to questions
specifically relevant to drug development. In drug
development the ultimate use of a biomarker is as a
surrogate end point, which requires that the biomarker has
been qualified to substitute for a clinical standard of truth
(i.e., the biomarker reasonably predicts the clinical
outcome and therefore can serve as a surrogate). After a
biomarker is "qualified" by the FDA, industry can use the
markers in a similar context in multiple drug trials, drug
classes, or clinical disorders, without having to repeatedly
seek the agency's approval ["Qualification Process for Drug
Development Tools," (http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guida
nces/UCM230597.pdf)].
The FDA qualification process for biomarkers also
encompasses guidance on drug-development tools,
includeing radiographic or other imaging-based measurements. Qualification of a drug-development tool is based
on a conclusion that within the stated context of use, the
results of assessment with the tool can be relied upon to
have a specific interpretation and application under
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

regulatory review. The FDA guidance indicates, "While a
biomarker cannot become qualified without a reliable
means to measure the biomarker, FDA clearance of a
measurement device does not imply that the biomarker
has been demonstrated to have a qualified use in drug
development and evaluation." Instead the qualification
process is limited to specific patient populations and a
specific therapeutic intervention. In addition to the
biomarker assay validation data, clinical data are required
to support the biomarker qualification. A corollary of this
regulatory principle is that the FDA qualification of a drugdevelopment tool for one application does not extend to its
use in other applications.

Evaluating the Validity of Diagnostic
Biomarkers in Clinical Medicine
The validity of a diagnostic biomarker for any medical
disorder generally is established via evaluation of its
sensitivity, specificity, prior probability, positive predictive
value, and negative predictive value (Mayeux 1998).
Sensitivity refers to the capacity of a biomarker to identify a
substantial percentage of patients with the disease-ofinterest (expressed as: true positive cases divided by [true
positive cases plus false negative cases] x 100). Thus a
sensitivity of 100% corresponds to a marker that identifies
100% of patients with the target condition. Specificity refers
to the capacity of a test to distinguish the target condition
from normative conditions (e.g., aging) and other pathological conditions (expressed as: true negatives divided by
[true negative cases plus false positive cases] x 100). A test
with 100% specificity would be capable of differentiating
the target condition from other conditions in every case.
Prior probability is defined as the frequency of occurrence
of a disease in a particular population (true positives plus
false negatives divided by the total population). A perfect
biomarker would detect only true positives and no false
negatives and thus would reflect accurately the prevalence
of the disease in the population. Positive predictive value is
the percentage of people who have a positive test who can
be shown by a definitive examination (e.g., subsequent
autopsy or biopsy) to have the disease (true positives
divided by [true positives plus false positives]). A positive
predictive value of 100% indicates that all patients with a
positive test actually have the disease. For a biomarker to
be considered useful clinically, it generally is expected to
show a positive predictive value of approximately 80% or
more (e.g., Consensus Report…1998). Negative predictive
value represents the percentage of people with a negative
test that subsequently proves not to have the disease on
definitive examination (true negatives divided by [true
negatives plus false negatives]). A negative predictive value
of 100% indicates that the test completely rules out the
possibility that the individual has the disease, at least at the

3

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

time the individual is tested. A reliable marker with a high
negative predictive value is extremely useful in clinical
medicine, although a test with low negative predictive
value can in some cases still be useful if it also has high
positive predictive value.
In the development of medical tests the threshold for
distinguishing abnormal from normal alters the sensitivity
and specificity in opposite ways. Thus if the threshold is set
further from the distribution of normative values then the
test becomes less sensitive for detecting true positives, but
more specific for rejecting true negatives. The convention
in establishing diagnostic tests for medical conditions has
been to select an intermediate choice that minimizes the
total error from both false positives and false negatives
(Lilienfeld et al 1994).
In the case of AD the Consensus Report of the Working
Group on Molecular and Biochemical Markers of Alzheimer's Disease, for example, recommended that in order
to qualify as a biomarker the measurement in question
should detect a fundamental feature of neuropathology
and be validated in neuropathologically-confirmed cases,
and should have a sensitivity >80% for detecting AD and a
specificity of >80% for distinguishing other dementias
(Consensus Report….1998). The validation of diagnostic
biomarkers for AD has been facilitated by the capability for
confirming the diagnosis post mortem. Thus the current
clinical criteria for returning a diagnosis of “probable AD”
provide a sensitivity of about 85% when compared to
autopsy-confirmed cases. In order for a diagnostic biomarker to be clinically useful, therefore, its sensitivity must
exceed this value when correlated to neuropathology
(otherwise there is no benefit to performing the test). For
example, the validation of a diagnostic neuroimaging
marker for β-amyloid pathology in AD, [F-18]florbetapir, is
being evaluated partly on the basis of correlating
florbetapir-PET data acquired antemortem with evidence
of β-amyloid in the same subjects post mortem. The results
rated as positive or negative for β-amyloid agreed in 96% of
29 individuals assessed in the primary analysis cohort. In a
secondary analysis, non-autopsy cohort, florbetapir-PET
images were rated as amyloid negative in 100% of 74
younger individuals who were cognitively normal (Clark et
al 2011), suggesting that negative results on this test hold
high negative predictive value.
Nevertheless, the outcome of the FDA evaluation of [F18]florbetapir-PET for commercial use as a clinical
diagnostic tool illustrates another central principle in the
validation of an imaging diagnostic biomarker, namely that
the reliability of ratings across radiologists must be
relatively high. In January 2011, the Peripheral and Central
Nervous System Drugs Advisory Committee of the FDA
recommended against approval of the new drug application for [F-18]florbetapir injection, based largely on
concerns about the variability of ratings across readers.
The Advisory Committee chair said during an interview
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

after the meeting, "We would like to see some structured
training and evidence of consistency among readers"
(http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/739297). In the
pivotal trial described in the previous paragraph, Clark et
al. (2011) used the median of three readers' visual ratings
on a five-point scale to assign the extent to which the PET
scan was positive for amyloid protein binding. Since
inspection of the data from individual readers ultimately
raised questions about inter-rater reliability, the FDA
response focused primarily on the need to establish a
reader-training program for market implementation that
would serve to ensure reader accuracy and consistency of
interpretation of existing [F-18]florbetapir scans.
The need to ensure that readers consistently can detect
clear positive or negative results extends to the clinical
application of any imaging procedure for which the results
depend on the subjective interpretation of a reader. For
biological assays that can be objectively quantified, the
accuracy often is characterized by comparing the assay
results obtained for a known standard (e.g., a test sample
with known concentration for the target compound) and
the reliability or reproducibility is statistically expressed
with respect to the variability in the quantitative results
obtained after performing repeated testing on the same
sample. In contrast, many types of clinical imaging
assessments depend upon subjective interpretation, such
as a radiologist’s reading of a radiographic or nuclear
medicine (e.g., PET, SPECT) image on the basis of gross
visual inspection of the image. In this case, the variability
of such interpretations is evaluated by characterizing the
reliability and variability of the results obtained within and
across raters.
Thus, intra-rater reliability can be established by
assessing the extent to which readings performed under
blind conditions by the same reader on the same image on
different days are in agreement, and/or the extent to which
the same radiologist renders the same results when
comparing images obtained from the same patient on
different days. Similarly, inter-rater reliability is assessed
by having multiple radiologists read the same set of images
while blind to the evaluations returned by the other
readers. These intra-rater and inter-rater reliability
assessments thus evaluate, respectively, the intraindividual variability (reflecting the failure of a reader to be
consistent with himself or herself) and the inter-individual
variability of interpretations (reflecting inconsistency of
interpretation among different readers).

Challenges in Establishing the Validity of
Diagnostic Biomarkers in Psychiatry
An important challenge in the application of neuroimaging
to psychiatric diagnosis is that the clinical utility of such
tests depends partly upon their ability to distinguish

4

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

multiple conditions from one other. In general both the
intra-individual and inter-individual variability of interpretation increases in proportion to the number of diagnostic categories that are considered clinically relevant. In
other words the fewer the categories into which readers are
assigning results, the greater the degree of agreement
between readers. This tendency was illustrated historically
by the results of a landmark study that evaluated the
variability in interpreting chest X-ray films during lung
cancer screening (Lilienfeld and Kordan, 1966). The study
radiologists showed 65.1% agreement when they were
required to place the film results into one of five categories
(suspected neoplasm, other significant pulmonary abnormality, cardiovascular abnormality, nonsignificant abnormality, and negative), compared to 89.4% agreement if they
were instead required to place the results into only two
categories (positive or negative for significant pulmonary
abnormality). Presumably, a diagnostic biomarker assessment aimed at informing the differential diagnosis of
psychiatric disorders would need to address more than two
categories, however, increasing the variability of image
interpretations across readers.
In psychiatry the need to differentiate various
conditions from each other depends partly on the clinical
imperative to return distinct treatment recommendations
for different disorders. It might be argued, for example,
that for a neuroimaging procedure to add clinical value in
the evaluation of an adult patient with impaired attention,
the differential diagnosis relevant to the treating physician
includes major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder,
attention deficit disorder, and anxiety disorders, at a
minimum (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), since
the standard of care differs between these categories. Thus,
the variability across raters will be relatively higher (i.e.,
lower inter-rater reliability) for a diagnostic imaging study
that must differentiate among several psychiatric disorders
that share symptomatology but require distinct treatment
approaches as compared to the case such as that described
above for [F-18]florbetapir-PET, which hinges only on two
categories (β-amyloid positive versus negative).
Furthermore, the determinations of positive and
negative predictive value are limited by the absence of an
established objective standard for establishing diagnosis in
psychiatric disease (e.g., analogous to the neuropathologically verified diagnosis of AD). Thus the absence of
certain knowledge about the pathophysiology of
psychiatric disorders will hinder the development and
validation of diagnostic biomarkers. Greater optimism has
been associated with establishing predictive biomarkers of
treatment response, pharmacodynamic biomarkers of the
effect of pharmacological probes, and surrogate biomarkers of treatment outcome based on translational
studies that ultimately can facilitate discovery of
pathophysiology.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Nevertheless, it might be argued that the Consensus
Report of the Working Group on Molecular and
Biochemical Markers of Alzheimer's Disease (1998)
reviewed above offers a template for developing diagnostic
biomarkers of psychiatric disease. Of course, the fundamental recommendation that “in order to qualify as a
biomarker the measurement in question should detect a
fundamental feature of neuropathology and be validated in
neuropathologically-confirmed cases” cannot be applied
directly to psychiatric disorders. Thus, the psychiatric
imaging field is moving forward by establishing goldstandard diagnoses using criteria based conventions (APA,
2000). If this approach for establishing the “actual”
diagnosis is accepted, then the remainder of this
Consensus Report can be meaningfully adapted to
biomarker validation in psychiatric disorders. This
approach would argue that a diagnostic biomarker should
have a sensitivity >80% for detecting a particular
psychiatric disorder and a specificity of >80% for
distinguishing this disorder from other psychiatric or
medical disorders (Table 1). The biomarker ideally also
should be reliable, reproducible, non-invasive, simple to
perform, and inexpensive. Finally, the validating data used
to establish a biomarker requires confirmation by at least
two independent sets of qualified investigators with the
results published in peer-reviewed journals.
Table 1. Recommended Steps in the Process of
Establishing a Biomarker
1. There should be at least two independent studies that
specify the biomarker’s sensitivity, specificity, and
positive and negative predictive values.
2. Sensitivity and specificity should be no less than 80%;
positive predictive value should approach 90%.
3. The studies should be well powered, conducted by
investigators with expertise to conduct such studies,
and the results published in peer-reviewed journals.
4. The studies should specify type of control subjects,
including normal subjects and those with a dementing
illness but not AD.
5. Once a marker is accepted, follow-up data should be
collected and disseminated to monitor its accuracy and
diagnostic value.
Adapted from (Consensus Report…1998)

According to this standard, the psychiatric imaging
literature currently does not support the application of a
diagnostic biomarker to positively establish the presence of
any primary psychiatric disorder. Although assessments of
intra-rater and inter-rater reliabilities commonly are
reported for quantitative neuroimaging measures, these
have been limited to establishing measurement reliability
(e.g., of cerebral volumes or neuroreceptor binding
potential), but not to the reliability of diagnostic interprettation. Thus the peer-reviewed scientific literature does
not yet contain an example of a diagnostic imaging bio-

5

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

marker with regard to a psychiatric disorder or treatment
for which relatively high intra- and inter-rater reliabilities
have been reported in two independent studies. Similarly,
there is not yet a case in the literature where neuroimaging measures obtained from the same region(s)-ofinterest has shown both a sensitivity of >80% for detecting
a particular psychiatric disorder and a specificity of >80%
for distinguishing this disorder from healthy controls or
other relevant psychiatric disorders. Nevertheless, the
ensuing sections review progress toward developing such
biomarkers using state-of-the-art neuroimaging technologies. Notably this literature contains several examples of
individual studies for which sensitivity and specificity
approach or exceed 80%, and it is conceivable that some of
these findings ultimately may be replicated in independent
studies.

Progress Toward a Diagnostic Imaging
Biomarkers of Depression
Wayne Drevets, M.D.
Scott Rauch, M.D.
While statistically significant group differences in various
neuroimaging measures are commonly observed in
patients with mood disorders, translating these findings
into diagnostic tests for the individual patient has proven
difficult. In general the conventional path to validating a
diagnostic test is first to generate a potential discriminant
function from a patient cohort, and then to test this
discriminant function in an independent cohort. Currently,
to our knowledge, no such tests have been validated
through replication in independent cohorts subject to
peer-review.
Difficulties are manifold. Mood and anxiety disorders
are highly heterogeneous entities and there is considerable
overlap in the statistical distributions between patients
with mood disorders and healthy controls in regional brain
volumes, receptor binding potential, BOLD hemodynamic
response, blood flow, metabolism, and other neuroimaging
measures. Secondly, neuroimaging techniques—especially
fMRI—are highly sensitive to normal temporal fluctuations
in patient physiology or to chemical substance intake that
may have nothing to do with mood symptoms (e.g. caffeine
consumption, nicotine) (1, 2), medical conditions that are
commonly comorbid with mood disorders and may
themselves affect imaging data (e.g. diabetes mellitus and
hypertension) (3), medication, which may independently
affect neurophysiology (e.g. lithium and antidepressants)
(4), and scanner resolution and sensitivity (signal-tonoise), which will limit the type of morphometric and
functional changes that can be measured accurately. The
development of imaging-based diagnostic algorithms that
are sufficiently robust to be applied across cohorts and
sites will thus be a significant challenge. Thirdly, the
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

statistical power of functional imaging scans, and the
ability to discriminate white matter and gray matter
boundaries using structural MRI, increases with time,
potentially leading to a tradeoff between accuracy and time
burden/cost. Fourthly, medication is a potent confound
not only because it may affect brain structure and function,
but also because it may bias classification algorithms. The
algorithms may distinguish patients from controls based
on the impact of different classes of medication rather than
diagnosis-specific neurophysiology. Conversely, if an
algorithm is developed on an unmedicated sample, it may
be inaccurate when applied to a medicated subject.
Currently, researchers are still in the process of
developing robust diagnostic classifiers within just one
cohort of patients at a time. The challenge is to determine
how best to identify the key prediction signals in the mass
of data produced by neuroimaging. One approach is to use
machine learning. Machine learning refers to a group of
statistical methods that are used to develop algorithms to
detect patterns or regularities within high-dimensional
data. An empirical data training set—for example, the MRI
data of DSM-IV-diagnosed patients versus healthy
controls—is used to develop an algorithm that optimally
distinguishes between these groups. Theoretically, the
computer will then be able to make intelligent decisions
about new cases based on the examples provided in the
training set. That is, the program “learns” from experience.
Once an algorithm has been developed, the gold
standard is to validate it on an independent cohort.
However, as discussed below, the papers published to date
have made use of a less stringent validation method—the
“leave out one” approach. That is, all subjects except one
patient-control pair are initially chosen to comprise the
training set and an algorithm that best separates the
diagnostic groups from each other is applied to the omitted
pair to predict their diagnostic status or treatment
response. The process is then iteratively applied to each
subject pair to test the ability of the algorithm to
distinguish between categories. That is, each omitted
subject pair comprises one training example. The “leave
out one” approach is less stringent because one would
expect to find significant variation across subject samples.
A proportion of this variation is likely to be noise—i.e., the
confounding effects of temporal fluctuations, medications
and other factors discussed above, and a proportion of this
variation is likely to result from disease heterogeneity. Only
by testing an algorithm on an independent cohort, can one
demonstrate that the discriminator is robust to these
confounds.
The accuracy of the algorithm is best characterized in
terms of its sensitivity and specificity scores. Sensitivity
refers to the test’s ability to correctly detect a condition in
those in whom it is present, while specificity refers to the
ability of a test to limit false positives in those who do not
have the condition.

6

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

Sun et al. (5) created cortical density maps for 36
healthy controls and 36 patients with recent onset
schizophrenia-spectrum or affective psychosis. On a group
level, the patients displayed reduced gray matter density in
regions such as the anterior cingulate and lateral surfaces
of the prefrontal and temporal cortices compared to the
control group. Machine learning methods were then
applied to the data to test whether these findings could be
applied at the individual subject level. Using a sparse
multinomial logistic regression classifier, 129 surface
voxels were linearly combined for classification allowing
for 86% accuracy in distinguishing between patients and
controls. Clusters with the highest weightings included the
frontal pole, superior and middle temporal regions of the
left hemisphere, and the superior temporal, somatomotor,
and subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC) regions of
the right hemisphere.
Fu et al. (6) used the voxel-wise hemodynamic response
to sad faces to distinguish acutely depressed patients with
major depressive disorder (MDD, n=19) from healthy
controls (n=19) with 82% sensitivity and 89% specificity.
Regions with the highest vector weights included the dorsal
ACC (dACC), middle and superior frontal gyri,
hippocampus, caudate, thalamus, and amygdala. The
same group achieved a less robust 65% sensitivity and a
70% specificity with the use of a working memory
paradigm in 20 healthy subjects and 20 unmedicated
patients with major depression (7). Interestingly, despite
the difference in task paradigm there was some overlap in
the regions that distinguished patients and controls in the
sad face task – the caudate, and the superior and middlefrontal gyri.
In another study, the hemodynamic response of the
default mode and temporal lobe networks during an
auditory oddball paradigm was applied a priori to a sample
of 14 medicated patients with bipolar disorder, type I (BD
I), 21 medicated patients with schizophrenia, and 26
healthy controls (8). The authors were able to distinguish
BD patients from patients with schizophrenia and healthy
controls with 83% sensitivity and 100% specificity. The
accuracy of the BD versus healthy control classification
was not provided. Most recently, Hahn et al. (9) utilized
three independent fMRI paradigms in an attempt to
maximize classification accuracy: the passive viewing of
emotionally-valenced faces, and two different versions of
the monetary incentive delay task emphasizing potential
winnings and potential losses, respectively. A decision tree
algorithm derived from the combination of the imaging
task classifiers produced a diagnostic sensitivity of 80% and
a specificity of 87% in a sample of 30 patients with
depression (both unipolar and bipolar) and 30 healthy
controls.
Several studies have recently used machine learning
methods to evaluate response to treatment with
antidepressant medication. In one such study, a whole
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

brain voxel-based morphometry (VBM) analysis predicted
treatment response to fluoxetine with 89% sensitivity and
89% specificity. The same algorithm derived from the VBM
analysis only differentiated MDD patients (n=37) from
healthy controls (n=37) with 65% sensitivity and 70%
specificity (10). Response to treatment was associated with
increased gray matter density of the rostral ACC, left
posterior cingulate cortex, left middle frontal gyrus, and
right occipital cortex at baseline (10). Gong et al. (11) used
structural MRI to predict antidepressant efficacy in 61
treatment naïve patients with depression. Patients who
failed to respond to 2 adequate trials of an antidepressant
were distinguished from treatment responders with 70%
sensitivity and 70% specificity based on gray and white
matter volumes: treatment responders had both greater
and lower baseline volumes of different regions in the
frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital cortices, as well
lower baseline volume of the putamen (11). Costafreda and
colleagues (12) reported that in 16 unmedicated patients
who met criteria for a major depressive episode, pretreatment response to implicitly-presented sad faces in regions
such as the dACC, midcingulate gyrus, superior frontal
gyrus, and posterior cingulate cortex predicted subsequent
response to cognitive behavioral therapy with a sensitivity
of 71% and a specificity of 86%.
Other attempts at predicting response to treatment
have been less successful. The functional imaging correlates of a verbal working memory task only predicted
response to fluoxetine with 52% specificity, although
sensitivity was 85% (7). Conversely, 62% of patients who
achieved clinical remission and 75% of patients who did
not remit following 8 weeks of antidepressant treatment,
were correctly identified as responders and nonresponders, respectively, with a sad face processing task (6).
In sum, current diagnostic and treatment prediction
methods have yielded sensitivities and specificities that
range from 70-90%. That is, approximately 3 out of 10
patients with a mood disorder would be incorrectly diagnosed as healthy, and approximately 1 out of 10 healthy
individuals would be incorrectly diagnosed with a mood
disorder. Nevertheless, none of the above-mentioned
studies have achieved this degree of diagnostic success in
an independent cohort, and this will be a crucial test for
the field. Ultimately, the patient burden and/or risk of the
scan, together with its financial cost, will have to be
balanced against the potential benefits of testing such as
improved outcomes and more cost efficient treatment. The
extent to which diagnostic and treatment misclassification
will be tolerated by clinicians and the health care industry
will ultimately be determined by this cost-benefit ratio.
Independent of the technical challenges involved in
developing diagnostic algorithms, we raise the issue of
whether the current approach to developing neuroimaging-based tests for the diagnosis of psychiatric
disorders is philosophically flawed. The claim that the

7

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

machine learning approach will lead to objective
biomarkers of psychiatric illness that will supplant the
clinical interview is circular because the algorithms are
trained to categorize patients based on clinical (i.e., DSMIV) diagnoses. Yet the raison d’etre of the biomarker is the
future supersession of the subjective diagnosis as the gold
standard. Our current diagnostic categories may subsume
multiple distinct disorders and thus attempting to forcibly
align neurobiology with DSM diagnoses is arguably
regressive. The identification of neurobiologically distinct
subtypes of mood disorders may be a more fruitful
approach to understanding the underlying biology of
psychiatric illness (13). In contrast, research that aims to
identify neuroimaging biomarkers of treatment response
should be encouraged as this approach is not subject to the
same tautological trap.

Progress Toward a Diagnostic Imaging
Biomarkers of Psychotic Disorders
Cameron Carter, M.D.
Going back to the original observations of enlarged
ventricles in schizophrenia (1, 2) as well as to observations
of functional hypofrontality (3, 4) and increased striatal
dopamine release [5] a broad range of reliable and well
replicated changes in brain structure, function and
chemistry have been revealed using modern neuroimaging
techniques. As is the case for many other behavioral and
neurobiological measures that have been shown to be
altered in schizophrenia, these widely replicated group
differences belie a substantial degree of overlap between
individual subjects data from patients with schizophrenia
compared to controls and other patient groups. This has
placed a major limitation on the use of neuroimaging as a
diagnostic biomarker of schizophrenia. As imaging
methods have become more sophisticated, leading to the
generation of massive multidimensional data sets, there
has been a renewed interest in the diagnostic use of these
methods by applying a new set of statistical and
computation tools that have gained traction in areas of
biomedicine. These new tools offer the hope of identifying
subtle patterns in complex data sets that can be used to
accurately identify group membership. This approach,
known as Classification Analysis, applies statistical and/or
computational methods to identify a “hyperplane” of
features in high dimensional data that can be used to
distinguish between groups. The goal of such an approach
is to use individual subject MRI data (structural, functional
or both) to differentiate between membership in diagnostic
groups with high positive and negative predictive value.
This is a rapidly developing field and there are now a
number of reports of what would be considered good
classification rates for samples that include schizophrenia
patients and either healthy controls or patients with
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

bipolar disorder. This includes a small number of studies
that report positive and negative predictive values that
exceed 80% (6, 7) Demirci, see also Calhoun (8) who
presented specificity and sensitivity data in this range). As
discussed below, many of the studies published to date
have significant methodological limitations and it is
important to note that in no case has a method been
independently replicated in an independent and comparable sample of patients and /or controls, one of the key
requirements for diagnostic biomarker status as discussed
above.
As this research approach has matured it has also
become clear that there are a number of critical
methodological issues that have limited progress toward
that application of this approach to enhance clinical
diagnosis. As discussed in Demirci et al (2008), a number of
studies have only classification accuracy for the entire
sample rather than separately for each group. High overall
classification can be driven by very good classification
performance for one group (either patients or controls) but
poor performance for another, which would limit the
clinical utility of such an approach. Many of the early
classification studies were conducted in very small samples
such that their generalizability would be questionable and
as such must be considered proof of concept. There are a
number of ways in which classification methodology can
be biased, such as by selecting the features forming the
basis of classification based upon the entire data set being
classified or failing to keep test and training set separate
during all steps of the analysis. These problems are present
to some degree in a number of the published studies using
classification methodology to distinguish schizophrenia
patients from other groups.
In a recent critical review Demirci et al (2008) stress the
importance of large, well characterized and described
sample sizes, multi-site data sets, and unbiased use of
classification methods along with detailed reporting of
results in future classification studies using imaging data in
schizophrenia patients.
In addition to differentiating patients from controls,
efforts have been made to extend this approach to the
important area of risk prediction. Risk syndromes for
psychotic disorders, based upon clinical assessment
techniques that detect the presence of sub-threshold
symptoms[9] have been shown to be reliably applied in the
research settings across the world and predictive of
transition to psychosis in the 20-40% range. This relatively
low positive and negative predictive value limits the utility
of this approach for guiding treatment. A number of
research groups have sought to identity structural and
functional differences in the brain in the risk state and to
evaluate the predictive value of these findings for clinical
and functional outcomes. The results of these studies have
been quite variable. For example, one of the leading groups
in this area reported that the presence of reduced cortical

8

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

gray matter in prefrontal cortex and the temporal lobes are
seen in at risk individuals who later made the transition to
psychosis, while medial temporal lobe abnormalities
accompanied the emergence of psychotic symptoms (10).
A more recent paper from the same group, using different
analytic methods, reported the opposite finding, with
reduced prefrontal gray matter being related to the risk
syndrome per se while reduced medial temporal lobe gray
matter was related to transition. The latter study had one of
the larger samples reported to date but clearly additional
well powered studies and meta-analyses will be needed to
clarify the relationship between changes in gray matter and
psychosis risk in the clinical high risk syndrome. To date
one study has reported the use of pattern classification
analysis based upon structural MRI data to differentiate
high-risk subjects from controls as well as those who later
transition to psychosis versus those who do not. In this
single study the classification success rate was over 80% for
each group and also for a second independent healthy
control group. Further replication in an independent at
risk group will be needed to establish the reliability and
generalizability of this potentially promising result (11).
Two final points related to the use of structural and
functional MRI data for classification should be made. The
first is that there is little standardization of either the
acquisition or analysis methods and for this approach to
have a clinical impact the field would need to develop
consensus on this. More fundamentally, the validation of
classification methods requires a diagnostic gold standard,
and for mental disorders in general and schizophrenia in
particular this is a tall order. DSM schizophrenia itself is
clearly a heterogeneous disorder that has phenotypic
overlap at the behavioral level as well as in brain structure
and possible function and so it may be unrealistic to
achieve a consistently high level of classification in clinical
practice.
In summary considerable effort is currently being
invested in using modern statistical and computational
tools to utilize structural and functional MRI for diagnostic
purposes in patients with schizophrenia and related
disorders. This approach has yielded some promising
results but also methodological caution that seems largely
addressable as more rigorous studies are performed on a
much larger scale than has been typical to date. While
there is reason to be hopeful that these methods will
eventually yield generalizable and replicable results that
will permit their application in clinical practice, at this time
classification analyses remain a research tool only.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Progress Toward a Diagnostic Imaging
Biomarkers for Cognitive Decline
Jonathan McConathy, M.D., Ph.D.,
Yvette Sheline, M.D.
In the past decade there has been a proliferation of studies
examining cognitive decline in the elderly. Many of these
studies have been small with small numbers of enrollees. It
is becoming increasingly important to determine which
studies and methods have achieved sufficient sensitivity
and specificity that they can guide diagnostic or therapeutic decisions. The major focus of molecular and
structural imaging for dementia has been on Alzheimertype dementia (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). These three types of
dementia differ in terms of presentation, prognosis,
etiology and response to therapeutics, although clinical
overlap is not uncommon (1-5). We will highlight those
studies with sufficient power to make meaningful
conclusions concerning the role of imaging biomarkers in
cognitive decline and dementia.
Traditionally, the clinical work up of dementia has
focused on clinical assessment, neuropsychological
testing, and exclusion of other etiologies. Recently, the
National Institutes of Aging (NIA) and the Alzheimer’s
Association have issued new diagnostic criteria for AD and
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) that build upon the 1984
NINDCS/ARDRA guidelines that suggest that the use of
biomarkers and neuroimaging can enhance diagnostic
confidence (3, 6). An important concept introduced in
these guidelines is the AD pathophysiological process (e.g.,
β-amyloid deposition in the brain) which can be observed
in some cognitively normal individuals and is thought to
represent preclinical disease in this group of people. The
AD pathophysiologic process is distinct from AD dementia
which requires objective evidence of cognitive deficits
established through clinical assessment. Autopsy studies
have demonstrated that the accuracy of clinical diagnosis
for AD is approximately 80% (7, 8). In addition to limitation
in accurate diagnosis, reliance on clinical assessment alone
may not be optimal for clinical trials for therapies that slow
or prevent the progression of dementia because some of
the preclinical AD pathophysiological processes appear to
precede clinical manifestations of dementia by years.
Biomarkers for the AD pathophysiological process could be
used to select participants in clinical trials as well as to
monitor response to therapies. It is important to note that
new guidelines issued by the NIA and Alzheimer’s
Association restrict the application of imaging and CSF
biomarkers to research applications and do not include
these biomarkers in their clinical diagnostic criteria.

9

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

Structural Biomarkers
Very mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD) or mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) are characterized by magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) volumetric decreases in medial
temporal lobe structures including the hippocampus (9)
where hippocampal volume is correlated with betaamyloid (Αβ□-associated memory decline (10, 11). Subjects
with MCI who show abnormalities in MRI and/or CSF
biomarkers are at greater risk for cognitive decline and
progression to AD than subjects without these
abnormalities (12). However, the cross-sectional sensitivity
and specificity of volumetric differences compared with
controls has not been demonstrated. At this time,
therefore, structural MRI alone cannot be used to diagnose
clinical dementia. In contrast, the sensitivity for detecting
within-subject changes in structure is quite high. In one
study, predictive prognosis of MR images obtained at one
time point versus combining single-time-point measures
with 1 year change measures were compared. To determine the value of including measures of longitudinal
change in addition to the atrophy measures from a singletime-point MR imaging examination, individualized risk
estimates were derived from the atrophy scores for
thickness and volume measures calculated at the 1-year
follow-up MR exam. Using the risk based on the atrophy
progression scores, the discrimination improved
significantly in the ability to predict conversion to AD,
relative to predictive ability of using single-time-point
measures (13). A study which examined subregional neuroanatomical volumetric change as a biomarker for AD to
quantify the comparative sensitivity for detection of
longitudinal atrophy changes, found that the regions with
most sensitivity were entorhinal cortex and inferior
temporal cortex (14). This could potentially provide a
sensitive method to detect within subject change and
potentially enough power to detect treatment induced
change. For example, in prospective therapeutic trials, the
number of intent-to-treat subjects necessary to detect
differences in trajectory as a function of an intervention
can be estimated (14). In addition to stand-alone
prediction of AD, MRI has been used to augment CSF
biomarkers. In MCI subjects who were abnormal on both
CSF and MRI measures there was a 4 times higher risk to
progress to AD within less than 2 years than those who
were abnormal on only one of these measures (15, 16). On
the other hand, another study found that the best
predictors of progression to AD, such as entorhinal
thickness or trail making test B was comparable to any
combination of predictors (17).

activity of specific biochemical processes including
receptors, transporters, enzymes and metabolic pathways.
Currently, positron emission tomography (PET) and single
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) which
use radiolabeled tracers are the primary molecular imaging
techniques used for imaging in dementia in humans. PET
has higher spatial and temporal resolution and is more
easily quantified than SPECT. There has been a great deal
of work of the past 3 decades using PET and SPECT for
human neuroimaging clinically and in the research setting.
Molecular imaging has established utility for neuroimaging in dementia, particularly AD (18, 19). The glucose
18
analogue 2-[ F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG), several
11
18
C- and F-labeled tracers that bind Aβ plaques, the SPECT
perfusion agents 99mTc-labeled ethyl L,L-cysteinate dimer
(ECD) and hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO),
and the dopamine transporter ligand FPCIT will be
discussed in this section as biomarkers for specific
18
dementias. [ F]FDG and SPECT perfusion imaging have
been evaluated in each of these types of dementia, while
Aβ imaging has focused primarily on AD. FPCIT has been
used primarily to differentiate dementia with Lewy bodies
(DLB) from AD.
There are a number of other PET and SPECT tracers
that have potential applications in dementia. Tracers
targeting nicotinic and cholingergic acetylcholine receptors, acetylcholinesterase, dopamine D1 and D2 receptors,
serotonin 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors, vesicular monoamine transporters (VMAT), and the peripheral benzodiazepine receptors in activated microglia have all shown
differences between subjects with dementia compared to
controls (19, 20). These tracers represent promising
research tools, but there is not enough data to support
their use as imaging biomarkers for dementia at this time.
Pathologic analysis of brain tissue obtained at autopsy
is considered the best reference standard for establishing
the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of biomarkers in
dementia. There are several considerations unique to PET
and SPECT biomarkers for dementia. The methods used
for image acquisition, reconstruction and analysis can
affect the diagnostic performance of these imaging
modalities, particularly when quantitative data analysis is
performed. Because of spatial resolution limitations of PET
and SPECT, brain atrophy can artifactually decrease
measured tracer uptake and can be a potential confound to
visual and quantitative analysis. Correction for atrophy can
be performed based on anatomic imaging with CT or MRI.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
1) [18F]FDG

PET and SPECT Biomarkers
Molecular imaging uses tracers whose in vivo uptake
patterns and kinetics indicate and quantify the presence or
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

18
[ F]FDG-PET is the most widely used PET tracer in the
United States for both oncologic and dementia imaging,
and the regional uptake and retention of the PET tracer

10

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

FDG in the brain can provide a quantitative measure of
brain glucose metabolism. Numerous studies have
demonstrated progressively decreasing brain uptake of
FDG in AD patients over time, predominantly in the
parietotemporal, frontal and posterior cingulate cortices
which is thought to reflect neuronal injury and loss.
Currently, FDG-PET studies are reimbursed by the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for differentiating suspected AD from FTD. The clinical interpretation
of FDG-PET studies for the diagnosis of dementia can be
performed by qualitative visual analysis of the relative
levels of FDG uptake in relevant regions of the brain.
Quantitative analysis of regional FDG uptake can also be
performed through comparison with normative databases,
and there is data suggesting that this type of analysis can
improve diagnostic accuracy, particularly for less experienced interpreters (21, 22).
The sensitivity of FDG-PET for the diagnosis of early AD
is approximately 90% although the specificity for distinguishing AD from other types of dementia is lower (7173%) in studies that used autopsy confirmation as the
reference standard (22, 23). There is also data supporting
the use of FDG-PET to predict which healthy individuals
will develop mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and which
individuals with MCI will progress to clinical AD (24, 25).
Recent studies suggest that FDG may be a better marker for
progressive cognitive decline compared to amyloid imaging and CSF measures of Aβ levels (26). However, there is
also evidence that abnormal brain accumulation of tracers
targeting Aβ occurs before changes in FDG uptake (27).
A relatively small number of studies have examined the
ability of FDG to discriminate patients with AD from those
with FTD or DLB. In FTD, the typical pattern of FDG
hypometabolism predominantly involves the anterior
aspects of the frontal and temporal lobes, often
asymmetrically. In studies of subjects with AD and FTD,
high specificities have been reported (93-98%) with more
variable sensitivities (53-95%) (28-30). Some of this
variation is likely due to differences in patient population,
methods and reference standard (pathologic confirmation
versus clinical diagnosis). In a study of 31 patients with
autopsy-confirmed AD and 14 with FTD, FDG-PET was
more accurate than clinical assessment and differentiated
AD from FTD with a specificity of 98% and sensitivity of
86%.(29) The pattern of glucose hypometabolism is similar
in AD and DLB, but occipital hypometabolism typically is
present in DLB but not in AD which can be used to
distinguish these dementias. In studies of subjects with AD
and DLB, the reported sensitivities and specificities are
variable with ranges of values of 75 -83% and 72-93%,
respectively (31, 32).

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

2) Amyloid imaging
Abnormal homeostasis and aggregation of beta-amyloid
(Aβ) is a hallmark of the pathologic diagnosis of AD and is
thought to play a central role in the pathogenesis of AD (33,
34). The deposition of Aβ in the brain appears to precede
the development of AD by up to 10-15 years (35, 36). A
number of small molecule PET and SPECT tracers suitable
for measuring Aβ in the living human brain have been
developed over the past decade. One of the first amyloid
11
imaging agent developed was the PET tracer [ C]Pittsburgh
compound B (PiB), and this tracer has been used
extensively for research in subjects with AD and other
18
dementias. More recently, several F-labeled amyloid
imaging agents have been developed and evaluated for Aβ
imaging including florbetapir (AV-45), (37) flutemetamol,
(38) florbetaben, (39) and FDDNP (40). These tracers are
better suited to routine clinical use due to the longer halflife of F-18 compared to C-11 (110 min vs. 20 min). These
tracers are similar in terms of mechanism of action by
binding to the fibrillary form of the Aβ protein that occurs
in amyloid plaques (41).
In April 2012, [18F]florbetapir was approved by the FDA
for detecting abnormally increased β-amyloid deposition
in the brain in patients with cognitive decline. Comparison
with autopsy results demonstrated that positive
florbetapir-PET studies corresponded to moderate or
frequent Aβ plaques on neuropathology. Both flutemetamol and florbetaben are currently in late phase
clinical trials and appear to have similar diagnostic
properties based on the available published data.(42, 43)
With this class of tracers moving from the research to the
clinical setting, their proper use will require referring
health care providers and imaging physicians to
understand which patient populations will benefit from βamyloid imaging as well as the implications of both
positive and negative imaging studies. For florbetapir, a
negative study (no abnormally increased cortical tracer
uptake) is inconsistent with the diagnosis of dementia due
to AD but does not exclude other dementias or
neurological disorders that are not associated with βamyloid pathology. In contrast, a positive study with
florbetapir indicates the presence of abnormal levels of
amyloid but does not by itself establish the diagnosis of AD
dementia. As with PiB, positive florbetapir PET studies can
occur in 20-30% of cognitively normal older people, (44)
and the significance of this finding is an area of active
research. Additionally, Aβ deposition has been reported in
DLB, and AD pathology can potentially coexist with
neurological conditions causing cognitive decline. Because
abnormal Aβ PET and CSF studies are currently the earliest

11

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

known phenotypic marker of the AD pathophysiological
process and appear to precede clinically detectable
cognitive decline, these agents may be particularly useful if
disease-modifying therapies become available.
The most rigorous published evaluations of the
correlation between imaging findings and pathologic
confirmation of AD at autopsy are currently available for
PiB and florbetapir. Small studies comparing the brain
uptake of PiB and Aβ plaques on histopathologic analysis
have yielded mixed results, and sensitivity and specificity
measurements cannot be provided based on this limited
data.(45, 46) A recent study using florbetapir demonstrated
96% qualitative agreement of PET imaging with Aβ burden
on histopathologic analysis in a group of 29 subjects (15
meeting pathologic criteria for AD, 14 free of Aβ
pathology).(47) In the same study, 74 healthy controls less
than 50 years of age all were negative for Aβ based on
florbetapir-PET. One limitation of this study was the use of
consensus reads between 3 nuclear medicine physicians
with individual readers having more variable performance.
The data reported by the FDA in the prescribing
information document for florbetapir includes data from
59 subjects who had autopsies performed after florbetapirPET, and the majority reader method provided sensitivity
of 92% and specificity of 100%, although the sensitivity for
individual readers ranged from 69-95%. (48)
3) Perfusion imaging
99m
The use of lipophilic Tc-labeled complexes that readily
cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) with subsequent
trapping are well-established radiopharmaceuticals for
measuring brain perfusion (49). Regional decreases in
brain perfusion measured with the ECD and HMPAO are
similar to the regional decreases in glucose metabolism in
AD, and regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) has been
proposed as method for diagnosing AD (50). In general,
direct comparisons between FDG-PET and rCBF measured
with SPECT have shown higher sensitivity and specificity
with FDG-PET (51). In the past, the large differential in cost
and availability between PET and SPECT cameras and
radiopharmaceuticals greatly favored the use of SPECT.
However, the recent widespread adoption of FDG-PET for
oncologic imaging has decreased this difference
significantly.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
18

1) [ F]FDG-PET
[18F]FDG has shown utility in distinguishing AD from FTD
based on different patterns of decreased regional brain
glucose metabolism. Unlike AD, the brain regions with the
18
most marked relative decreased in [ F]FDG uptake are in
the frontal and/or anterior temporal cortices in FTD.
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Overall, studies of subjects with AD and FTD, high
specificities have been reported (93-98%) with more
variable sensitivities (53-95%) (28-30). The largest study
assessing the ability of [18F]FDG to distinguish AD (n=31)
from FTD (n=14) with pathologic confirmation found
sensitivity of 86% and specificity of 97% (29).
2) SPECT perfusion
Measurement of rCBF with SPECT perfusion agents has
been used to distinguish FTD from AD. In a study using
99mTc-labeled HMPAO in subjects with pathologically
confirmed FTD (n=25) and AD (n=31), reduction of frontal
rCBF permitted diagnosis of FTD with a sensitivity of 80%
and specificity of 65% (52). When bilateral frontal reduced
rCBF was present, the sensitivity was unchanged but the
specificity increased to 81%. However, diagnosis based on
SPECT alone was less accurate than clinical diagnosis.
3) Amyloid agents
There is currently insufficient data to define the role of
amyloid imaging agents as a biomarker to distinguish FTD
from AD, although the different pathophysiologies and
several small studies suggest that Aβ imaging may be useful
to distinguish FTD from AD. Together, these studies
demonstrate that 11-25% of patients with clinically
diagnosed FTD have abnormally increased cortical Aβ
deposition as measured with [11C]PIB or [18F]fluorbetaben (53-55). None of these studies had autopsy confirmation, and the significance of the Aβ deposition in the
FTD subjects is unclear. One hypothesis is the small
percentage of patients with FTD and abnormal cortical Aβ
deposition may be in part explained by co-morbid FTD
and AD in the same patient.
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
1) [18F]FDG-PET
[18F]FDG has shown utility in distinguishing AD from DLB
based on different patterns of decreased regional brain
glucose metabolism.(56, 57) The pattern of decreased brain
[18F]FDG uptake in DLB is similar to AD with the exception
of involvement of occipital cortex, particularly the primary
visual cortex, in DLB but not AD. In studies of subjects with
AD and DLB, the reported sensitivities and specificities are
variable with ranges of values of 75 -83% and 72-93%,
respectively.(31) (32, 56) In a study combining both clinical
and histopathologic confirmation of diagnosis, [18F]FDGPET was found to have a 90% sensitivity and 80%
specificity for distinguishing AD from DLB.(56)

12

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

2) SPECT perfusion
Studies examining the ability of 99mTc-labeled ECD and
HMPAO to distinguish AD from DLB have shown similar
18
sensitivity and specificity as [ F]FDG-PET.(58) The regional
pattern of decreased brain perfusion is similar to the
18
pattern of glucose metabolism observed with [ F]FDG.
Some studies have reported 85% sensitivity and 85%
specificity for this indication, (59) although other groups
have found substantially lower values (sensitivity of 65%,
specificity of 87%) (60). Additionally, these studies used
clinical diagnosis as the reference standard and were not
histopathologically confirmed.
3) Dopamine transporter (DAT) imaging
123
The SPECT agent [ I]FPCIT (ioflupane) has been used to
discriminated DLB from other dementias based on the loss
of dopaminergic neurons which in turn leads to decreased
DAT density in the striatum. This agent has also been used
to study the loss of dopaminergic neurons that occurs in
Parkinson’s disease and related syndromes and is clinically
approved for clinical use in Europe and the U.S. to
distinguish Parkinsonian syndromes from essential tremor
(61). A 2007 multicenter trial in Europe with 326 subjects
demonstrated that FPCIT has a sensitivity of 78% and
specificity of 90% for distinguishing DLB from other
dementias, primarily AD, using clinical diagnosis as the
reference standard (62). A smaller retrospective study
(n=44) demonstrated lower sensitivity (63%) but higher
specificity (100%) based on consensus diagnosis after 12
month follow up as the reference standard (63). A small
prospective study that included 20 patients with dementia
and pathologic analysis at autopsy, FPCIT was 88% specific
and 100% specific for differentiating DLB from other
dementias compared to lower values of 75% and 44%,
respectively, based on initial clinical diagnosis (64).

4) Amyloid agents
There is insufficient data to use amyloid imaging agents to
distinguish DLB from AD. The available data suggests that
Aβ deposition occurs frequently in DLB and may correlate
with cognitive deficits.(65, 66)

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Progress Toward Diagnostic Imaging Biomarkers for Child Psychiatric Disorders
Daniel P. Dickstein, M.D.
Kerri L. Kim, Ph.D.
Karen E. Seymour, Ph.D.
Matthew F. Pescosolido
Among the most important scientific trends in the past
thirty years is the growing recognition that neuropsychiatric disorders are developmental disorders, with
antecedents starting in childhood. Though in some
respects, this “back-to-the-future” phenomenon takes us
back to psychiatry’s founding, it differs from prior
incarnations in an important aspect: empirical data.
Starting with the Decade of the Brain initiative in the 1990s
and continuing with the present emphasis on translational
research, studies have shown that psychiatric illness can
start in childhood, and such patients have brain/behavior
alterations from typically-developing controls (TDC)
without psychopathology. This neuroimaging research is
critically important to understanding the pathophysiology
of child psychiatric disorders, holding the promise of
future biomarkers that could augment clinical history for
better, more specific, and earlier psychiatric diagnosis and
treatment—akin to methods currently employed to fight
cancer with greater and greater success.
To qualify as a potential biomarker, a finding must not
only be a quantitative difference between participants with
one or another specific condition, such as attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and typically-developing
controls (TDC) without psychopathology, it must also be
specific to ADHD relative to other psychiatric conditions.
At least three possible study designs can examine
specificity: (1) multi-group studies (e.g., ADHD vs. TDC vs.
third group whose psychopathology is closely related to
ADHD, such as oppositional defiant disorder or another
form of cognitive impairment); (2) computer algorithms
that predicts if a participant has ADHD or not based on
neuroimaging parameters (also known as machine
learning); or (3) studies employing pre- and post-treatment
neuroimaging to identify neural predictors of treatment
response. Finally, the finding would have to be
independently replicated. Taken as a whole, at this point in
time, although the majority of such findings in child
psychiatric disorders demonstrate important, but relative,
quantitative differences, the differences are not yet
sufficiently large, specific, or replicated to serve as
neuroimaging biomarkers that are useful in making a
psychiatric diagnosis on a case-by-case basis. In fact, in
terms of providing clinically useful information, few if any
results suggest any diagnostic utility for imaging beyond
ruling-out the presence of known neurological illnesses. Of
course, the hope is that continued progress in current

13

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

methods will one day lead to improvements in this
situation.
We focus our attention on three of the most important
categories of child psychiatric disorders: (1) attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD], (2) mood and
anxiety disorders (including major depressive disorder
[MDD], bipolar disorder [BD], and generalized anxiety
disorder [GAD]), and (3) autism spectrum disorders (ASD;
including autistic disorder and Asperger’s disorder).

ADHD
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
ADHD is among the most common psychiatric disorders
affecting children, with 6-9% of children and adolescents
struggling with ADHD (1). ADHD involves developmentally-inappropriate symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity, with resultant functional
impairment, including academic underachievement and
school failure, problems in social relations with adults and
peers, risk for antisocial behavior patterns including
substance use, and increased levels of risky sexual behavior
(2-4).
Research has suggested that fronto-striatal alterations
lie at the core of ADHD. One of the most interesting lines of
research supporting this position comes from longitudinal
imaging studies of children with ADHD as they progress
through adolescence and young adulthood. These structural MRI studies have demonstrated that ADHD is unlikely
the result of a static, unchanging lesion, but rather
represents a developmental lag in neural development (57). Moreover, this provides biological evidence for the
persistence of ADHD into adulthood for some patients, in
contrast to the belief that ADHD only affects children.
While these data are important advances that
contribute to our understanding of the brain and behavior
interactions underlying ADHD, there is no current
neuroimaging biomarker for ADHD. The vast majority of
neuroimaging studies to date demonstrate relative, quantitative differences between ADHD and TDC participants
that are neither sufficiently large nor specific enough to be
useful on a case-by-case basis as a diagnostic or treatment
biomarker. Below, we discuss studies that have begun to
address this scientifically and clinically important need.
Pediatric ADHD: Structural MRI Studies
As is true for many neuropsychiatric disorders, the vast
majority of structural MRI studies in ADHD are crosssectional studies that compare the volume of certain brain
regions of interest (ROIs) in ADHD vs. TDC participants.
However, a handful of studies have begun to test the
specificity of such alterations.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Among the earliest examples was a 1996 study by
Semrud-Clikeman et al. who used ROI measurements to
predict group membership for children ages 6-16 years old
who were diagnosed as either ADHD combined type (n
=10), dyslexic (N=10), or TDC (n=10). Using predictive
discriminant analysis based on six ROI measurements,
including length of the left and right plana temporala,
length of the left and right insula, and width of the left and
right anterior frontal region, they achieved a 60% accuracy
in predicting diagnosis. When the model expanded to
include age and full-scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ),
accuracy improved to 87%. Further testing showed that the
left insula length, left planum length, and right frontal
region width were particularly useful indices for
discriminating between groups (8).
Additionally, Kates et al. 2002 examined the specificity
of deficits in the frontal-striatal-thalamic circuitry in boys
ages 7-12 years-old with ADHD (N=13), Tourette’s
syndrome (TS; N=13) and age- and gender-matched
controls(N=13) using a frontal lobe subparcellation
protocol that combined contiguous sulcal and gyral
boundaries to derive frontal lobe modules based on prior
functional studies. They found significantly reduced gray
and white matter volumes in the PFC among ADHD boys
vs. those with TS or TDC. However, these PFC differences
were no longer significant when expressed as a ratio of
total cerebral volume (9).
A third and more recent 2010 study by Soliva et al. used
computer modeling to examine caudate body volume
(CBV) as a potential neuroimaging biomarker for ADHD.
Prior work had shown that ADHD vs. TDC participants had
significantly decreased right CBV, but no significant
changes in left CBV or bilateral caudate head volume (10).
Soliva employed this finding to determine if the ratios of
right CBV to total bilateral caudate volume(rCBV/tbCV)
and right CBV to bilateral caudate body volume
(rCBV/bCBV) could predict the diagnostic status of
children with and without ADHD (ages 6-17; N=39 per
group). Indeed, the rCBV/bCBV ratio was found to be
statistically different between the groups (t=3.16, p=0.001)
with a large effect size (Cohen’s d=0.84). Using nonparametric receiving operator characteristic (ROC) analysis
for the rCBV/bCBV ratio, they found an area under the
curve (AUC) of 0.84, with a sensitivity of 60% and
specificity of 95%. Assuming an ADHD prevalence rate of
10%, the rCBV/bCBV ratio method yielded a specificity of
94.74% and an estimated negative predictive value of
93.64%. Taken as a whole, this study suggests the critical
importance of the caudate in ADHD, although the
potential role of the CBV as a neuroimaging biomarker of
ADHD requires independent replication and demonstration of specificity via a multi-group study involving a
psychiatric control group of children whose psychopathology is closely related to ADHD, such as ODD or other
cognitive issues (11). Moreover, the conclusions across

14

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

these first two studies are quite different, demonstrating
the failure to provide independent documentation of
comparable effects.
A fourth study by Lopez-Larson et al. (2009) provided
an example of such a multi-group study. They conducted a
four-group ROI analysis of children ages 6-19 years: (1)
ADHD alone (N=23), (2) pediatric BD alone (N=30), (3)
pediatric BD plus ADHD (N=23), and (4) TDC (N=29). They
found that ADHD-only participants had significantly
smaller amygdala, caudate, and putamen volumes compared to BD youths with and without ADHD and also to
TDC with medium to large effect sizes. Although this study
did not test the predictive value of the rCBV/bCBV ratio of
Soliva et al. above, it did complement that study in
supporting further study of caudate volume as a potential
neuroimaging biomarker for ADHD (12).
Similarly, Liu et al. (2011) recently published very
similar data examining a four-group ROI analysis of
children ages 9 to 18 years-old with: (1) ADHD alone
(N=11), (2) pediatric BD alone (N=12), (3) pediatric BD plus
ADHD (N=17), and (4) TDC (N=24). Consistent with LopezLarson et al. 2009, Liu found that children and adolescents
with ADHD had disorder-specific reductions in bilateral
caudate and putamen volumes. Additionally, Liu identified
BD-specific increases in caudate, putamen and globus
pallidus volumes in youth with pediatric BD alone (13).
In a meta-analysis utilizing a combination of Activation
Likelihood Estimation (ALE) and the rank approach used in
Genome Scan Meta-Analysis (GSMA), Ellison-Wright et al
2008 examined structural MRI results from 7 studies
comparing youth with ADHD (N=144) to TDCs (N=143).
They found significant regional grey matter reduction in
the right putamen/globus pallidus region for ADHD vs.
TDC participants (14). Notably absent from structural
neuroimaging literature examining biomarkers of ADHD
are treatment studies which contrast morphometric
differences before and after medication treatment. To our
knowledge, no controlled trials have examined the effect of
stimulant medication on structural brain abnormalities in
youth with ADHD suggesting a critical area for future
research. Additional limitations include small samples
sizes, limited exploration of ADHD subtype effects, and
examination of medicated youth with ADHD as opposed to
youth with ADHD off medication. Furthermore, the
aforementioned studies demonstrate few strongly
replicated findings. For example, some have demonstrated
basal ganglia volumetric alterations (12, 13), while others
have not (6, 15, 16). These inconsistencies highlight the
need for replication with larger sample sizes to resolve
inconsistencies and examine potential effects of ADHD
subtype and medication status.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Pediatric ADHD: Diffusion-tenor imaging (DTI)
DTI is another form of structural MRI whose goal is the
evaluation of white-matter integrity and connectivity. Two
studies have begun to advance the study of putative white
matter biomarkers of ADHD by evaluating the specificity of
such alterations vis-à-vis participants with other forms of
psychopathology.
Pavuluri et al. (2009) conducted a three-group DTI
study among children with ADHD (N=13), BD (N=13), or
age- and IQ-matched TDC (N=15). They found that ADHD
youths had significantly lower fractional anisotropy (FA)
and regional fiber coherence index (r-FCI)—i.e., measure
of the degree of coherence in a given fiber tract—in white
matter fibers of the internal capsule coursing between the
neocortex and the brainstem compared to BD and TDC
youths. Moreover, ADHD youths had significantly greater
apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)—i.e., the average
diffusion rate among different diffusion directions under a
Gaussian distribution—than either BD or TDC participants
in all eight white matter tracts. Both ADHD and BD youths
had significantly lower FA in the anterior corona radiata
(ACR) compared to TDC. From this, the authors concluded
that ADHD is characterized by more diffuse white matter
changes, whereas those in BD youths are more focal,
residing in the prefrontal ACR and posterior cingulate (17).
Davenport et al. 2010 also conducted a three-group DTI
study, comparing white matter integrity in adolescents
ages 10-20 years old with ADHD (N=14), schizophrenia
(N=15), or TDC (N=26). ADHD participants had signifycantly higher FA in the left inferior and right superior
prefrontal regions than either those with schizophrenia or
TDC. In contrast, participants with schizophrenia had
significantly lower FA in the bilateral cerebral peduncles,
anterior and posterior corpus callosum, right anterior
corona radiata, and right superior longitudinal fasciculus
vs. those with ADHD or TDC. Both patient groups had
lower FA in left posterior fornix than TDC participants. The
authors conclude that although patients with ADHD or
schizophrenia share some overlapping cognitive and
behavioral deficits, such as deficits in working memory,
sustained attention, and response inhibition (Barr, 2001;
Oie & Rund, 1999), these deficits originate from different
white matter alterations (18).
A recent review of the child/adolescent and adult
ADHD DTI literature by Konrad and Eickhoff (2010)
suggests the need for future studies to examine the
trajectory of white matter development and anatomical
connectivity as findings from structural studies emphasize
reductions in overall white matter volume in youth with
ADHD while studies in adulthood indicate an overall
increase in white matter volume (19). Further, DTI studies
suggest decreased coherence and integrity of white matter
tracts connecting the right prefrontal cortex to the basal
ganglia and in the tracts connecting the cingulate gyrus to

15

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

the entorhinal cortex in youth with ADHD compared to
TDCs (20;21). Therefore, additional research is needed to
elucidate how changes in anatomical structures over time
in individuals with ADHD relate to connectivity both at rest
and during task-engagement as well as relating DTI
findings to functional brain networks.
Pediatric ADHD: Functional MRI (fMRI)
Event-related fMRI studies have evaluated the neural
activation linked to several cognitive tasks associated with
particular symptoms in ADHD. The following fMRI studies
have begun to address questions of specificity inherent in
delineating potential neuroimaging biomarkers.
Three studies by Rubia and colleagues have evaluated
the specificity of brain/behavior alterations underling
inhibitory control associated with ADHD. In the first, Rubia
et al. 2008 conducted a multi-group event-related fMRI
study of inhibitory control in boys ages 9-16 years with
either ADHD (N=20), conduct disorder (CD, N=13), or TDC
(N=20). They found that ADHD participants had specific
decreases in neural activation during successful inhibition
trials vs. CD and TDC participants in the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and inferior PFC (22). In a
related second study, Rubia et al. 2009 examined cognitive
interference and attention using a Simon game task in boys
ages 9-16 years with ADHD (N=20), CD (N=13), or TDC
(N=20). No ADHD-specific brain activation changes were
identified during interference inhibition. However, during
the attention allocation aspect of the task, the ADHD group
had a specific under-activation in the left ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), while both ADHD and CD
participants had reduced activation in right dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) (23). A third study by Rubia et
al. 2010, compared inhibitory control in boys ages 9-16
years with either ADHD (N=18), obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD, N=10), or TDC (N=20). They found that
ADHD participants had specific alterations in the right
inferior PFC, but ADHD and CD participants had
dysfunction in the right ventromedial orbitofrontal cortex
(OFC) during successful inhibition and in left medial PFC
during inhibition failures (24). Taken together, these
studies suggest that PFC alterations during response
inhibition may be specific to ADHD, though replication in
larger, independent samples is needed.
Brotman et al. sought to determine the specificity of
emotional face processing alterations previously identified
in BD youths by conducting a four group study of children
and adolescents ages 8-17 years with either: (1) ADHD
(N=18), (2) BD (N=43), (3) severe mood dysregulation
(SMD; N=29), or (4) TDC (N=37). ADHD participants had
significantly increased neural activity in the left amygdala
when rating their fear of emotionally neutral faces
compared to BD, SMD, and TDC participants. Although
ADHD is primarily considered to be a behavioral disorder,
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

this finding aligns with others’ suggestion of the need to
study the neural underpinnings of affect in ADHD (25).
Additional findings and implications with respect to
pediatric BD are discussed below in the mood disorders
section (26). Passorotti et al evaluated unmedicated ADHD
patients (N=11), unmedicated BD youths (N=15), and TDC
(N=15) on a motor response inhibition task. They found
that ADHD participants had reduced activation in the
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) vs. both BD and TDC
participants (27).
Augmenting task-dependent event-related fMRI, the
past several years have witnessed a groundswell of interest
in task-independent fMRI—i.e., spontaneous fMRI neural
activation data collected while the participant is at rest
(“resting state” fMRI). Studies suggest that 95% of the
brain’s metabolism is devoted to such resting-state activity,
in contrast to the estimated 5% devoted to task-dependent
activities (28-30). Discovery science in resting-state fMRI is
particularly robust in ADHD, due in part to the “1000
Functional Connectomes Project” whereby researchers
have posted their resting state fMRI data on the
Neuroimaging
Informatics
Tools
and
Resources
Clearinghouse (NITRC) website (www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000),
making it freely available to all those wanting to push the
limits of what the data can tell us about the brain. This also
includes the ADHD-200, a competition to encourage
researchers to develop machine-learning methods to
classify participants based on ADHD yes/no status
(http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/adhd200/index.html).

This is likely to result in numerous future publications,
though the first such study was conducted by Zhu et al.
2008. This study employed regional homogeneity (ReHo)
methods to classify youth with ADHD (N=12) and TDC
(N=12). They found a generalization rate of 85%, sensitivity
of 78% and specificity of 91%. Several areas were identified
as highly discriminative, including the anterior cingulate
gyrus, PFC, putamen, occipital cortex, temporal cortex,
cerebellum, and thalamus (31). To date, few functional
neuroimaging studies of ADHD youth have employed
meta-analytic approaches to examine consistencies within
the literature. Of note, Dickstein et al. 2006 utilized ALE to
evaluate 16 functional neuroimaging studies comparing
patients with ADHD to TDCs. While studies included both
adult and child/adolescent samples, results suggested a
consistent pattern of widespread frontal hypoactivity
involving the anterior cingulate, dorsolateral prefrontal,
inferior prefrontal, and orbitofrontal cortices, portions of
the basal ganglia and the parietal cortices in patients with
ADHD compared to TDCs. Removal of adult studies did
not result in the detection of additional regions of interest;
however, effect sizes were reduced when examining childor adolescent-only studies (32).
Moving forward, meta-analytic techniques, such as
ALE, need to be employed focusing on functional

16

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

neuroimaging studies of only children and adolescents.
Moreover, domain specific (e.g., motor inhibition, working
memory, attentional control, etc.) meta-analyses of
functional findings are needed given inconsistencies
within the literature. Use of different behavioral tasks to
assess functional differences also limits replication, and
small sample sizes limit generalizability.

Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Beyond ADHD, neuroimaging research has also advanced
our understanding of the brain and behavior interactions
underlying pediatric mood (i.e., major depressive disorder
[MDD] and bipolar disorder [BD]) and anxiety disorders. As
in ADHD, the majority of studies to date have employed
cross-sectional MRI methods to identify structural, DTI,
and fMRI differences between participants affected by
depression, anxiety, or BD compared to TDC. Given the
considerable overlap between these disorders, although
quantitative differences have been identified by such
studies, there is considerable need to probe their specificity, to independently replicate their findings, and to
delineate their longitudinal trajectory. Thus, there are no
neuroimaging findings that would be considered biomarkers for pediatric mood and anxiety disorders on a
case-by-case basis at present, though the discovery of such
biomarkers is an important and needed goal.

compulsive disorder (OCD; N=24, mean age 13.02+2.92),
and TDC (N=30; mean age 14.11+2.57). Focusing on
cortical thickness, they found that the right peri-calcarine
gyrus, post-central gyrus, and superior parietal gyrus were
thinner in depressed vs. OCD and TDC youths, whereas the
left-sided temporal pole was thicker in depressed youths
than in either group. Moreover, secondary analyses
showed that these cortical thickness differences were
primarily driven by children with MDD plus a family
history of MDD (N=15) (39)—a finding directly in contrast
with those of Nolan et al. 2002. Specifically, Noalan et al.
did not find PFC volume differences when comparing
depressed youth with depressed family members to TDC .
Instead, they found that depressed youth with non-familial
MDD had significantly larger left PFC than those with
familial MDD or TDC (40). Such inconsistencies highlight
the current state of the neural underpinnings of pediatric
depression. To allow for comparison across studies, further
efforts are needed utilizing standardized methods of
assessment and longitudinal design that account for
extraneous factors (e.g., family history, comorbid
conditions, age, medication status).
Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, no
structural MRI studies have employed machine learning or
leveraged studies combining neuroimaging with psychopharmacological or psychotherapeutic treatment to
advance our potential understanding of structural MRI
biomarkers associated with pediatric depression.

Depression
Depression: Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
Depression causes significant morbidity and mortality in
children, adolescents, and young adults annually, includeing school and work absenteeism, substance abuse, and
inter-personal conflict (33, 34). More disturbing is the fact
that suicide perennially remains among the top four causes
of death in those ages 10-24 years old in the U.S. (35).
Neuroimaging studies of pediatric depression have
focused primarily on the amygdala as well as the PFC,
including the OFC and anterior cingulate cortex. Yet, there
is relatively little consistency in the direction (increased vs.
decreased) of these findings, regardless of whether the
neuroimaging method involves structural MRI, fMRI, or
DTI. For example, of three structural MRI studies of
amygdala volume in pediatric depression vs. TDC, one
study reported bilateral decreases (36) while two failed to
find such significant differences (37, 38).
Unfortunately, there are no studies employing machine
learning or computer models of structural MRI, fMRI, or
DTI data as potential diagnostic tools.
Depression: Structural MRI
Fallucca et al. 2011 conducted the only multi-group
structural MRI study of pediatric depression, comparing
those with MDD (N=24; mean age 13.96+2.41), obsessive© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

While a few DTI studies have examined potential white
matter abnormalities associated with pediatric depression,
none are known to gauge the specificity of findings through
use of a multi-group design (41, 42).
Depression: Functional MRI (fMRI)
The state of fMRI research in pediatric depression mirrors
that of structural MRI studies in that few have probed the
specificity of difference between MDD vs. TDC youths.
In fact, only three known studies have begun to
evaluate the specificity of emotional face processing in
pediatric depression. In the first, Thomas et al. 2001
compared emotional face processing in girls with either
MDD, anxiety (i.e., primary generalized anxiety disorder
[GAD} or panic disorder), or TDC (N=5 in each of these
three groups; mean age of each sample approximately 12
years). They found that depressed girls had significantly
less left amygdala activity than anxious or TDC girls when
viewing faces regardless of the stimuli’s emotional content
(43). One strength of this research is the use of a multigroup design—comparing youth with MDD to TDC and
another clinical group. However, complicating these
findings is the reliance on such small samples, as well the

17

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

comorbid conditions potentially unaccounted for. While
none of the anxious youth were diagnosed with MDD, 2/5
youth with MDD had GAD.
In the second, Roberson-Nay et al. 2006 evaluated
emotional face encoding using a subsequent memory
paradigm. Specifically, participants first completed an
event-related fMRI scan requiring them to attend to
emotional face stimuli. Then they completed a post-scan
memory task that required them to identify if they had, or
had not, seen emotional face stimuli during their fMRI.
Unlike Thomas and colleagues who found decreased
amygdala activity among depressed youth, they found that
MDD youths (N=10; age=13.8+2.7 years) had increased left
amygdala activity when successfully encoding emotional
faces compared to anxious (N=11; age=11.5+1.5 years) and
TDC (N=23; age=14.8+2.2 years) participants (44). Again, a
notable subset of depressed youth had comorbid anxiety
(i.e., 4/10) while no anxious (i.e., 3 separation anxiety, 3
social anxiety, 9 GAD) were given a comorbid MDD
diagnosis.
In the third study, Beesdo et al. compared face viewing
in three groups of children ages 7-17 years: (1) MDD (N=26;
14 with comorbid anxiety and 12 without comorbid
anxiety); (2) anxious youths without depression (N=16),
and (3) TDC (N=45). Among their findings, they noted
disorder-specific alterations when passively viewing faces,
with MDD participants having decreased activation, and
anxious participants having increased activation, when
viewing fearful vs. happy faces. Addressing the potential of
comorbidity lacking in other studies, Beesdo and
colleagues found that excluding the subset of adolescents
with comorbid MDD and anxiety did not alter results (45).
Forbes et al. 2010 then paired fMRI with a treatment
study to evaluate neural predictors of treatment response.
This study compared pre- and post-treatment neural
activity on a reward anticipation task among depressed
adolescents (N=13) receiving either cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT; N=7) or CBT plus a selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI; N=6). Among their findings, they
demonstrated that less medial PFC and greater striatal
activity pre-treatment was associated with post-treatment
clinical severity and reductions in comorbid anxiety
symptomatology. Importantly 10 of 13 participants had comorbid generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). This suggests
that fronto-striatal activity may be important in pediatric
depression, as well as highlighting the potential phenomenological and/or DSM-IV nosological conundrum of
the overlap between MDD and GAD, especially in children
where irritable mood can serve as a diagnostic symptom
for either disorder (46).
Taken as a whole, although there clearly have been
strides toward understanding the pathophysiology of
pediatric depression, findings can best be described as
preliminary as studies have used varying cross-sectional
methodologies (e.g., different MRI tasks) with small
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

samples of diagnostically complicated youth (e.g.,
presence of comorbid diagnoses). To better examine the
diagnostic specificity of neural differences and gauge their
worth as potential biomarkers, future studies should
therefore aim to replicate previous findings with larger
samples, using similar (if not the same) imaging
paradigms—particularly to compare depressed youth to
TDC, as well as other clinical groups.

Anxiety Disorders
There are more than ten separate anxiety disorders
recognized by current psychiatric nosology as depicted in
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 4th Edition-Text
Revision (DSM-IV-TR). While excessive fear, avoidance
and/or worry are shared by all anxiety disorders, we will
focus this review on the group of anxiety disorders often
referred to as the “phobias”—i.e., generalized anxiety
(GAD), social anxiety (SOC), panic (PD), separation anxiety
(SAD), and specific phobias (SP) disorders as they are
commonly collapsed under the umbrella term of ‘anxiety
disorders’ in studies examining clinical features, functional
impairment and neural underpinnings of the classification
category. This grouping is largely consistent with the
findings of several important studies describing the
structure of psychopathology, as these disorders are
described as the fear-based internalizing disorders (compared to dysphoric or distress disorders which include
GAD, MDD, and dysthymia) (47-49). GAD was nevertheless
included in this grouping given its relevance (and high cooccurrence) with other anxiety disorders, as well as the
paucity of efforts existing to delineate the pathophysiology
of GAD alone (50). With respect to other anxiety disorders,
evidence suggests that OCD and post-traumatic stress
disorder may have differing neurobiology from ”phobic”
anxiety disorders. That said, studies of anxiety implicate a
“fear circuit” consisting of the amygdala, medial and lateral
PFC, and hippocampus in the biology of anxiety disorders.
More broadly, these studies include animal models,
typically developing humans across the lifespan, and adult
patients diagnosed with anxiety. Neuroimaging studies of
pediatric anxiety have focused on these ROIs, though
conclusions about potential biomarkers are again limited
by relatively small sample sizes and the need for more
studies that can test the specificity of such findings.
Pediatric Anxiety Disorders: Structural MRI
Structural MRI studies have implicated the amygdala in the
pathophysiology of pediatric anxiety. However, the
direction (increased or decreased) of these findings vs.
TDC participants is often inconsistent. For example, De
Bellis et al. found that GAD participants (N=12; age
12.7+2.4) had significantly larger right and total amygdala
volumes vs. age-, sex-, height-, and handedness-matched

18

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

TDC (N=24; age=12.5+2.3years) (51). In contrast, Milham et
al. found the opposite, with anxious youths (GAD,
separation anxiety disorder, and/or social phobia; age
12.9+2.3) having decreased left amygdala volume and no
difference in either right or total amygdala volume vs. age-,
gender-, and intelligence-matched TDC (N=34; age
12.4+2.2 years) (52).
To the best of our knowledge, no study has tested the
specificity of potential structural MRI alterations in
pediatric anxiety disorders. This deficiency is related to the
lack of large, well-powered multi-group studies, studies
using machine learning or other computer algorithm, and
studies linked to pharmacological or psychotherapy
treatment.
Pediatric Anxiety Disorders: Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI)
Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, there are no
DTI studies that evaluate the specificity of white matter
abnormalities in pediatric anxiety disorders (i.e., GAD,
SOC, SAD, PD, SP).
Pediatric Anxiety Disorders: Functional MRI
As in studies of pediatric depression, several studies have
used event-related fMRI to examine the brain/behavior
interactions underlying pediatric anxiety disorders. Also as
in studies of depression, many of these have employed
emotionally-valenced visual stimuli, including faces, and
have focused on the amygdala given its role in both fear
circuitry and face processing.
In fact, the multi-group studies by Beesdo et al. and
Thomas et al. described above in the pediatric depression
section are among the best examples. Specifically, Beesdo
et al. found that anxious youths without depression (N=16)
had significantly greater amygdala activation when
passively viewing fearful vs. happy faces compared to those
with MDD plus comorbid anxiety (N=26; age 14.08+2.23)
and to TDC participants (N=45; age 13.93+2.18) (45).
Additionally, Thomas et al. found similar patterns of
exaggerated amydala activity for a small sample of anxious
youth (N=5; drawn from larger sample with mean
age=12.8+2.1 years) vs. TDC participants (N=5; drawn from
larger sample with mean age=12.1+2.6 years) and
depressed peers (N=5; mean age=12.3+2.7 years). While
both anxious and TDC youth showed overall increased
amygdala activity when viewing faces regardless of
emotional content, only the anxious youth had signifycantly increased right amygdala activity when viewing
fearful vs. neutral faces, and the magnitude of this neural
activation correlated positively with child-reported anxiety
on the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders
(SCARED). In contrast, the depressed group showed

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

decreased left amygdala activity when viewing fearful faces
(43).
Other fMRI studies, while not outright comparing two
patient groups to TDC participants, have at least attempted
to acknowledge the potential role of comorbid conditions.
In this vein, Monk et al. compared GAD participants
(N=17; age=13.13+2.09 years) to TDC participants (N=12;
age=14.33+1.67 years) while attending to emotional faces.
Their main finding was that GAD participants had
significantly increased amygdala activity vs. TDC when
viewing angry faces, and that level of activation was
significantly and positively correlated with anxiety disorder
severity (based on participants’ Pediatric Anxiety Rating
Scale scores [PARS]). Post-hoc comparisons to test
specificity showed that both GAD only (N=9) and those
with both GAD and MDD (N=8) had greater amygdala
activation than TDC, suggesting that comorbid depression
was not driving their results (53).
Similarly, Lau et al. evaluated phenotype/genotype
interactions among participants with GAD and/or MDD
(N=31; age=13.52+2.32 years) to TDC participants (N=33;
age=13.71+2.73 years) using neural activation from an
emotional face attention task and genotypes of the
serotonin transporter gene. Their main finding was a
significant 3-way genotype X diagnosis X face emotion
interaction, with GAD/MDD participants with two copies
of the LA allele showed greater amygdala responses to
fearful faces compared to GAD/MDD participants with S or
LG alleles. This finding did not change when excluding
patients with MDD only (54).
No studies have employed machine learning techniques to evaluate fMRI neuroimaging findings as potential
biomarkers of pediatric anxiety disorders. However,
McClure et al. have paired neuroimaging with treatment to
explore potential neural markers of treatment response.
Specifically, they demonstrated that greater pre-treatment
amygdala activation during a face-attention task was
significantly associated with better treatment response
(based on Clinical Global Impressions Severity scores) for
youth with primary GAD or SOC (N=12, age=11.8+1.8 years)
receiving either 8-weeks of CBT (N=7) or fluoxetine (N=5).
Of note, treatment type (psychotherapy vs. medication)
was chosen by families, and all participants significantly
improved during treatment, though neural predictors of
treatment outcome were not compared across treatments
(55).
To address this limitation, Maslowsky et al. 2010
extended McCLure’s data by comparing ventrolateral PFC
(VLPFC) and amygdala activity for GAD participants
treated with CBT (N=7; age 13.4+1.7 years) and fluoxetine
(N=7; age=13.3+2.5 years). While both groups significantly
improved and had increased post- vs. pre-treatment
VLPFC activity, only the CBT group had increased bilateral
amygdala activity. Post-treatment VLPFC or amygdala

19

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

activation did not significantly relate to the decrease in
anxiety symptoms from pre- to post-treatment (56).
In summary, the current state of neuroimaging as a
potential biomarker of pediatric anxiety disorders resembles that of depression—i.e., these data are important clues
about the pathophysiology of anxiety, but they are far from
ready for clinical application to the diagnosis and
treatment of anxiety disorders in children. For this to ever
become a reality, we need more studies, involving large
samples and longitudinal assessments. There is also a need
to determine the specific brain/behavior interactions
underlying particular types of anxiety, rather than
clustering them.

Pediatric Bipolar Disorder (BD)
Pediatric bipolar disorder (BD) is among the most
controversial of all psychiatric disorders affecting children
and adolescents today. Although pediatric BD was once
thought to be quite rare, recent studies demonstrate a
marked increase in numbers of children and adolescents
being diagnosed with BD. This rise from the mid-1990s
through the present has been demonstrated in both
inpatient psychiatric and outpatient medical settings in the
U.S., as well as internationally, including Germany (57-59).
Thus, there is a pressing need to understand the
brain/behavior interactions underlying pediatric BD.
Research has focused on fronto-temporal neurocircuitry. In particular, researchers have explored the
relationships between frontal regions of the DLPFC and
VLPFC, temporal regions, including the amygdala, and
striatal regions, including the caudate and accumbens
area. As highlighted below, there are a number of multigroup studies and treatment/imaging studies that have
begun to evaluate the specificity of these neuroimaging
findings in BD youths, but there are few studies that
employ machine learning or other computer algorithms to
predict diagnostic status or treatment outcome. Such work
is progressing, but is important to note that, as in the other
disorders discussed, there is no current neuroimaging
biomarker for pediatric BD that is useful on a clinical caseby-case basis.
Pediatric BD: Structural MRI
Structural MRI studies have implicated alterations in the
fronto-temporal regions in the pathophysiology of
pediatric BD. By far, the most consistent anatomical
finding in pediatric BD is significantly reduced amygdala
volume compared to TDC, now found in seven of nine
cross-sectional structural MRI studies to date (60-66), but
not in two others (12;67). In fact, this is more replicated
than most neuroimaging findings across all forms of
pediatric or adult psychiatric illness.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Although there are few multi-group structural MRI
studies that compare BD youths to those with other forms
of psychopathology, it is interesting to note that the two
that failed to find significant decreases in amygdala volume
were multi-group studies. Specifically, Lopez-Larson et al.
studied four groups of children: (1) those with BD plus
comorbid ADHD (N=23), (2) those with BD without ADHD
(N=30), (3) those with ADHD without BD (N=23), and (4)
TDC participants (N=29). They found that ADHD youths
had significantly smaller total amygdala volume as well as
total caudate and putamen volume vs. BD with ADHD, BD
without ADHD, and TDC groups (12).
Frazier et al. also conducted a four-group crosssectional MRI study, including the following: (1) BD plus
psychosis (N=19), (2) BD without psychosis (N=35), (3)
schizophrenia (N=20), and (4) TDC (N=29). There were no
significant differences between BD and schizophrenia
groups with respect to amygdala (or hippocampal) volume.
However, they did identify a group X sex interaction, with
schizophrenic males having the smallest left amygdala
volume, while BD females having the smallest
hippocampal volumes (67).
Other multi-group studies have evaluated volumetric
alterations in other brain regions. For example, Liu et al.
compared the following four groups of children and
adolescents: (1) BD plus comorbid ADHD (N=17), (2) BD
without ADHD (N=12), (3) ADHD without BD (N=11), and
TDC (N=24). Although the ADHD-only findings have been
discussed in the ADHD section, it is notable that Liu found
that BD-only participants had larger caudate, putamen,
and globus pallidus volumes than the other groups (13).
Chiu et al. evaluated anterior cingulate gyrus volume in
children with (1) BD (N=16), (2) autism spectrum disorders
(ASD, N=24), and (3) TDC (N=15). They found that BD
participants had significantly smaller left ACG volumes
compared to both the ASD and TDC participants. There
was no such difference in right ACG volume (68).
Pediatric BD: Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
Few DTI studies have evaluated the specificity of white
matter alterations to pediatric BD by conducting multigroup studies. In one, Frazier et al. compared children (1)
with BD (N=10), (2) at-risk for BD by having a first-degree
relative with BD (N=7), and (3) TDC (N=8). The BD group
had decreased FA in the cingulate-paracingulate white
matter vs. both at-risk and TDC participants, whereas both
BD and at-risk participants had reduced FA in the bilateral
superior longitudinal fasciculus (69). In another study,
Pavuluri et al. compared FA in children with (1) BD (N=13),
(2) ADHD (N=13) and (3) TDC (N=15). No findings
distinguished the BD participants from either the ADHD or
TDC groups (17).

20

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

Pediatric BD: Functional MRI (fMRI)
FMRI studies of pediatric BD participants have probed the
brain and behavior interactions underlying a number of
cognitive and emotional processes, including emotional
face processing, attention, and cognitive flexibility. Most of
these studies have identified relative differences between
BD and TDC youths. However, some have begun to
address issues of specificity by multi-group comparisons or
by pairing imaging with treatment.
For example, Brotman et al. evaluated attention to
emotional faces by comparing youths diagnosed with: (1)
BD (N=43), (2) ADHD (N=18), (3) severe mood
dysregulation (SMD (70); N=29), and (4) TDC participants
(N=37). Whereas prior studies had demonstrated that
pediatric BD participants had altered PFC–amygdala–
striatal neural activation vs. TDC children when viewing
faces, including pictures of faces with happy, angry, or
neutral emotions (66;71;72), Brotman et al. did not find
BD-specific findings. Instead, in addition to the ADHDspecific findings discussed in the ADHD-fMRI section,
Brotman et al found that SMD participants had
significantly decreased amygdala neural activation vs.
those either meeting Leibenluft et al. 2003’s criteria for
narrow-phenotype BD (i.e., having clear-cut episodes of
mania with elevated, expansive mood ), or those with
ADHD or TDC (26;70).
Thomas et al. used an implicit face-emotion processing
task to demonstrate that BD participants (N=20) had
significantly less amygdala activity in response to angry vs.
neutral faces than either SMD (N=21) or TDC participants
(N=16) (73).
Passarotti et al. employed an emotional valence Stroop
task (i.e., requiring participants to match the color of a
positive, negative or neutral word to a one of two presented
colored circles) to study children and adolescents with
either (1) BD (N=17), (2) ADHD (N=15), and (3) TDC
(N=14). Both BD and ADHD participants had greater
DLPFC and parietal cortex activation than TDC when
viewing negative vs. neutral words. Despite these shared
regions of hyperactivity, differences between the patient
groups also emerged. Specifically, BD participants had
greater activation in the VLPFC and ACC, whereas the
ADHD group showed decreased VLPFC and ACC activity
(74).
Passarotti et al. again compared youth with BD (N=23)
or ADHD (N=14), and TDC (N=19) participants while
watching faces. They found that BD participants had
greater activity in regions implicated in emotional
processing (e.g., left medial PFC, subgenual ACC), while
the ADHD group showed greater activity in regions
implicated in prefrontal working memory (e.g., left DLPFC,
pre-motor regions) (75).
There are several treatment/imaging studies involving
pediatric BD participants. For example, Chang et al. have
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

examined the brain activity of BD adolescents (N=8)
treated with lamotrigine. Specifically, they evaluated brain
activity while viewing negative and neutral emotional
pictures at baseline and following eight weeks of treatment
(76). They found a significant decline in depressive
symptoms that was also associated with decreased right
amygdala activity when viewing negative pictures.
Pavuluri and colleagues have conducted a series of
important studies comparing fMRI activity in BD youths
before and after treatment with several anti-manic
medications, including lamotrigine, risperidone, and
divalproex. These studies employ block-design methodology, which is very good at detecting between-group
differences in neural activation though its ability to detect
group-by-cognitive task differences is limited compared to
event-related fMRI experiments. Taken as a whole, these
studies corroborate the fact that anti-manic medications
differentially influence the neurocircuitry underlying
pediatric BD (77-82).
Such studies, pairing neuroimaging and treatment, are
very important to advancing our understanding of
potential bio-behavioral markers that would guide
treatment, akin to what is commonplace in cancer
treatment. However, it is early in this process, with need for
replication to ascertain what, if any, neural markers can
ultimately guide treatment decisions or predict outcome.

Autism Spectrum Disorders
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD), including autistic
disorder, Asperger’s Disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS), are
among the most common and impairing psychiatric
conditions affecting children and adolescents today. In
fact, the Centers for Disease Control has shown that the
incidence of ASD had risen 10-fold from the year 1980 to
the year 2000, now affecting as many as 1/88 children in
the United States (83). As in other disorders, such as
pediatric BD, it remains uncertain if this represents better
awareness of ASD, over- or mis-diagnosis, or a
combination.
Thus, there is a pressing need to understand the neural
underpinnings of ASD. As in other disorders, studies have
employed structural MRI, fMRI, and DTI to elucidate the
underlying neurobiology associated with ASD. Most of
these have examined brain changes in ASD children and
adolescents from TDC, with few examining the specificity
of these findings by comparing sub-types of ASD
participants to one another (i.e., autistic disorder vs.
Asperger’s Disorder) or to those with other neuropsychiatric conditions (i.e., those with primary ADHD or
other non-ASD developmental delay [DD]).
A plethora of brain regions from every lobe have been
implicated in the neuropathology of ASD, from sub-regions
of the PFC to temporal, parietal, and occipital cortex, as

21

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

well as the cerebellum (84;85). One important finding in
ASD research has been early brain overgrowth in those
affected by ASD. This has been demonstrated not only in
neuroimaging studies, but also in studies examining head
circumference and post-mortem neuropathology in those
affected by ASD (86-92). However, for individual children,
such findings are not yet useful as diagnostic biomarkers of
ASD, whereby a measurement could rule in, or rule out,
ASD.
It is beyond the scope of this piece to summarize the
wealth of neuroimaging studies conducted with those
affected by ASD across the lifespan. Thus, what follows
represents only a sampling of this work. However, to date,
no replicated MRI neuroimaging biomarker for ASD has
been identified that can improve the specificity or quality
of ASD diagnosis or its treatment.
ASD: Structural MRI
Multi-group studies have begun to probe the specificity of
structural MRI alterations associated with ASD. For
example, Kaufmann et al. evaluated cerebellar vermis
volume in 3-9 year old boys with: (1) idiopathic autism
(N=10), (2) Down syndrome plus autism (N=16), (3) fragile
X syndrome plus autism (N=13), or (4) TDC participants
(N=22). They found that the ratio of cerebellar vermis
lobules VI-VII to total intracranial area was smaller only in
those with idiopathic autism compared to the other
groups, whereas increases in lobules VI-VII were seen in
autism associated with fragile X syndrome (93). In another
example, Petropoulos et al. failed to find specific
alterations among 3-4 year olds with either (1) ASD (N=45),
(2) TDC (N=26), and (3) DD (N=14), though they were
examining a different brain region—the mid-sagittal
corpus collosum—and also did not focus exclusively on
boys (94)
Other studies have begun to compare structural MRI
alterations between participants with ASD and those with
other forms of developmental delay. For example,
Petropoulos et al. compared 2-4 year olds with either (1)
ASD (N=60), (2) TDC (N=10), and (3) developmental delay
(DD; N=16). For this study, DD participants’ delay was
based upon impairments in standardized intellectual and
adaptive tests, but not meeting ASD criteria by the Autism
Diagnostic Observation Schedule–Generic (ADOS-G) or
clinical evaluation. Covarying for age, they found that DD
participants had prolonged cortical gray matter and white
matter T2 vs. both ASD and TDC participants, whereas ASD
participants had prolonged cortical gray matter, but not
white matter, T2 only vs. TDC participants. They conclude
that their data implicate a more general delay in neuronal
maturation among DD participants, whereas ASD
participants’ delay may involve gray, but not white, matter
(95).Herbert has compared ASD participants to those with
developmental language delay (DLD). They found no
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

significant differences in white matter volume between
ASD and DLD participants, though both differed from TDC
(96). A related study by Herbert et al. evaluated cortical
asymmetry among boys ages 5.7-11.3 years with (1) ASD
(N=16), (2) DLD (N=15), and (3) TDC (N=15). Compared to
TDC participants, those with either ASD or DLD had a
greater aggregate volume of significantly asymmetrical
cortical parcellation units (leftward plus rightward; 41.7%
ASD, 32.6%, 20.1%) and larger aggregate volume of rightasymmetrical cortex (28% ASD, 22% DLD, 7% TDC). This
rightward bias was more pronounced in ASD participants
than those with DLD. Moreover, DLD but not ASD
participants had a small but significant loss of leftward
asymmetry compared with TDC participants. From this,
the authors conclude that the right-asymmetry increase
may be a consequence of early abnormal brain growth
trajectories in ASD and DLD, while higher-order
association areas may be most vulnerable to connectivity
abnormalities associated with white matter increases (97).
With respect to studies comparing ASD participants to
those with other forms of psychopathology, Voelbel et al.
2006 compared 7-13 years old boys with (1) ASD (N=38), (2)
BD (N=12), and (3) TDC (N=13). They found that ASD
participants had greater left (LCV) and right (RCV) caudate
volume when covarying for intracranial volume and
stimulant use. Likewise, larger LCV and RCV in ASD
predicted a riskier response strategy in an attention task,
while the inverse was significant in TDC participants (98).
Similarly, Mostofsky et al. evaluated the relationship
between motor cortex white matter volume and motor
performance among 8-12 year old children with either (1)
ASD (N=20), (2) TDC (N=36), and (3) primary ADHD
(N=20). Motor impairments were evaluated using the
Physical and Neurological Examination of Subtle Signs
(PANESS). They found that the correlation between
PANESS score and left motor cortex white matter volume
significantly differentiated ASD children from those with
either ADHD or TDC, with increased white matter volume
predicting poorer motor skill. From this, the authors
concluded that these alterations in cerebral volume in ASD
participants may be more representative of global patterns
of brain abnormalities likely mediating other aspects of
ASD, including social and communication deficits (99).
Brieber et al. used voxel-based morphometry to
evaluate whole-brain alterations between 10-16 year olds
with (1) ASD (total N=15 including N=13 with Asperger’s
plus N=2 HFA) (2) ADHD (N=15), and (3) TDC (N=15). They
found ASD-specific increases in gray matter volume of the
right supramarginal gyrus, an area mediating mentalising
and theory of mind abilities (100).
Several studies have begun testing the role of structural
MRI parameters in confirming the clinical classification of
ASD participants. For example, Akshoomoff et al. used
discriminant function analysis of MRI brain measures,
including cerebellar vermis volume, total brain volume,

22

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

and gray and white matter volumes, to classify ASD (N=52,
ages 1.9-5.2 years) and TDC (N=15; ages 1.7-5.2 years)
participants. They found that 95.8% of ASD and 92.3% of
TDC participants were correctly classified. By adding
functional measures, they correctly classified 85% of ASD
cases as lower functioning and 68% of ASD cases as higher
functioning (101). Relatedly, Jiao et al. 2010 used machine
learning techniques to determine if thickness- and/or
volume-based structural MRI parameters could accurately
distinguish between children with ASD (N=22) and TDC
(N=16). They found that thickness-based models were
more effective than volume-based methods in differentiating ASD from TDC participants, with an 87%
accuracy rate (102) In a separate, but related study, Jiao et
al. 2011 used machine learning techniques to test if
thickness- and volume-based measures could differentiate
between 6-15 year olds with either Asperger’s Disorder
(N=5) or high-functioning autism (HFA; i.e., autistic
disorder with normal IQ; N=13). However, they found that
neither of these was able to effectively distinguish between
these two groups (103).
Although such results are promising, they require
further study, as there is no consistent, replicated
structural difference, or pattern of differences, that yet
would serve as a biomarker to of ASD. Additionally, these
studies have not been able to consistently differentiate
across the ASDs—i.e., to differentiate among participants
with autistic disorder, Asperger’s Disorder, or PDD-NOS.
Moreover, these studies have not consistently differentiated participants with either HFA, low-functioning
autism (LFA, autistic disorder with IQ<70), or Asperger’s
Disorder, including studies examining the amygdala or
hippocampus ; cerebellum or cerebellar vermis; or total
gray matter, white matter, or cerebral volume (104-107).
ASD: Functional MRI (fMRI)
Malisza et al. used fMRI to evaluate visual attention in
children ages 9-14 years with (1) ASD (N=8), (2) ADHD
(N=9), and (3) TDC (N=9). They found that the ASD group
had greater activation in the occipital gyrus and less
activation in the hippocampal gyrus than either ADHD or
TDC participants, suggesting that attentional processing
relies on different neural mechanisms in ASD and ADHD
participants (108). Christakou et al. also used fMRI to
examine sustained attention in boys ages 11-17 with ASD
(N=20), ADHD (N=20), and TDC (N=20). ASD boys had
increased cerebellar activation vs. ADHD and TDC
participants, whereas ADHD boys had significantly
reduced left DLPFC activation vs. ASD participants. They
also found that ADHD and ASD boys had significantly
reduced activation compared to TDC participants in
bilateral striato-thalamic regions, left DLPFC, and superior
parietal cortex as well as significantly increased precuneus
(109).
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Kaiser et al. evaluated the brain response to biological
motion—meaning motion that looks like that of an
animate object (e.g., an animal walking, running, or sitting
in contrast to random motion, like swirling dots)—in
participants ages 4-17 years old with either (1) ASD (N=25),
(2) their unaffected siblings (N=20), or (3) TDC (N=17). ASD
participants had specific decreases in neural activity in
areas including the right amygdala, ventromedial PFC, and
bilateral fusiform gyri. Interestingly, unaffected siblings
had compensatory increases in brain activity vs. either
those with ASD or TDC in the right ventromedial PFC—
anterior and inferior to their other finding—as well as the
posterior superior tempral sylcus. Thus, Kaiser’s study
suggests both state and trait neural alterations associated
with ASD (110).
Greimel et al. examined empathy in (1) ASD adolescent
boys (N=15 including N=12 with Asperger’s syndrome plus
N=3 HFA), (2) fathers of ASD participants (N=11), (3) TDC
adolescent boys (N=15), and (4) fathers of TDC participants
(N=9). Both ASD children and their fathers had
significantly reduced activation of the right anterior
fusiform gyrus compared to their age-equivalent TDC
participants (111).
Among the studies using fMRI brain activation to
evaluate diagnostic classification of participants, Lai et al.
conducted a two-stage study of neural activation in ASD.
First, they evaluated brain activation while listening to
human speech in ASD (N=12) and TDC (N=15)
participants. Then, they collected additional fMRI data in
ASD participants while sedated for clinically-indicated MRI
scans (N=27). They correctly classified 26 of 27 (96%) of the
sedated ASD participants from the second experiment
using the mean amplitude and spread of neural activity in
the superior temporal gyrus from the first experiment
(112). The future is likely to bring additional studies
examining the potential of specific fMRI alterations in
aiding diagnostic classification.
Functional MRI studies have found neural alterations
in ASD. However, like structural MRI studies, these studies
are limited by small sample sizes, lack of replication, and
an inability to consistently discern between other
disorders. Presently, there are no neuro-functional
biomarkers that can diagnose ASD.
ASD: Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
Several recent DTI studies have begun to evaluate the
specificity of white matter alterations among ASD
participants. For example, Lange et al. examined white
matter measurements from the superior temporal gyrus
(STG) and temporal stem in males with either HFA or TDC
(N=30 of each). With respect to the STG, they found
reversed hemispheric asymmetry of two measures of white
matter diffusion coherence: tensor skewness, and
fractional anisotropy. Specifically, HFA participants had

23

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

greater STG tensor skewness on the right and decreased
fractional anisotropy on the left compared to TDC
participants. They also found increased omni-directional,
parallel, and perpendicular diffusion in the right, but not
left, temporal stem among HFA participants vs. TDC. Most
interesting, these six measures had a very high rate of
discriminating ASD from TDC participants, with 94%
sensitivity, 90% specificity, and 92% accuracy in their
original sample as well as a replication sample of males
with idiopathic autism (N=12) and TDC (N=7) (113).
Barnea-Goraly et al. evaluated white matter integrity
via DTI scans among children with ASD (N=13), their
unaffected siblings (N=13), and a separate group of
unrelated TDC (N=11). They found that children with ASD
and, to a lesser extent, their unaffected siblings, had
reduced white matter functional anisotropy (FA) in the
right medial prefrontal white matter, right anterior forceps,
corpus callosum, right superior longitudinal fasciculus,
superior temporal gyrus, and temporoparietal junctions
(114).
Ingalhalikar et al. 2011 devised and tested a DTI-based
classifier system among ASD (N=45) and TDC (N=30)
participants. Their model employed a high-dimensional
non-linear support vector model to develop an
abnormality score involving fractional anisotropy (FA)
differences mainly in right occipital regions as well as in
left superior longitudinal fasciculus, external and internal
capsule while mean diffusivity (MD) discriminates were
observed primarily in right occipital gyrus and right
temporal white matter. Using this abnormality score, their
ability to distinguish between ASD and TDC participants
achieved 80% accuracy using leave one out (LOO) crossvalidation, with high significance p<0.001, specificity ~84%,
and sensitivity ~74% sensitivity (115).
In sum, DTI research is clearly an emerging and
promising tool in understanding neurodevelopmental
alterations associated with ASD. However, there is a need
to both replicate the above findings, as well as to test their
specificity by comparing ASD participants to those with
other forms of developmental delay or other primary
psychopathology.

Reference List
(1) Polanczyk G, Jensen P. Epidemiologic considerations in attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder: a review and update. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics of North America 17[2], 245-60, vii. 2008.
(2) Wilens TE, Biederman J, Brown S, Tanguay S, Monuteaux MC,
Blake C, Spencer TJ. Psychiatric comorbidity and functioning in clinically
referred preschool children and school-age youths with ADHD. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc.Psychiatry 41[3], 262-268. 2002.
(3) Pliszka S. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of
children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
46[7], 894-921. 2007.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

(4) Marks DJ, Mlodnicka A, Bernstein M, Chacko A, Rose S, Halperin
JM. Profiles of Service Utilization and the Resultant Economic Impact in
Preschoolers With Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Journal of
Pediatric Psychology . 11-20-2008.
(5) Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, Jeffries NO, Castellanos FX, Liu H,
Zijdenbos A, Paus T, Evans AC, Rapoport JL. Brain development during
childhood and adolescence: a longitudinal MRI study. Nature
Neuroscience 2[10], 861-863. 1999.
(6) Castellanos FX, Lee PP, Sharp W, Jeffries NO, Greenstein DK,
Clasen LS, Blumenthal JD, James RS, Ebens CL, Walter JM, Zijdenbos
A, Evans AC, Giedd JN, Rapoport JL. Developmental trajectories of
brain volume abnormalities in children and adolescents with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. JAMA 288[14], 1740-1748. 10-9-2002.
(7) Shaw P, Eckstrand K, Sharp W, Blumenthal J, Lerch JP, Greenstein
D, Clasen L, Evans A, Giedd J, Rapoport JL. Attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by a delay in cortical
maturation. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 104[49], 19649-19654. 12-4-2007.
(8) Semrud-Clikeman M, Hooper SR, Hynd GW, Hern K, Presley R,
Watson T. Prediction of group membership in developmental dyslexia,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and normal controls using brain
morphometric
analysis
of
magnetic
resonance
imaging.
Arch.Clin.Neuropsychol. 11[6], 521-528. 1996.
(9) Kates WR, Frederikse M, Mostofsky SH, Folley BS, Cooper K,
Mazur-Hopkins P, Kofman O, Singer HS, Denckla MB, Pearlson GD,
Kaufmann WE. MRI parcellation of the frontal lobe in boys with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder or Tourette syndrome. Psychiatry Research
116[1-2], 63-81. 11-30-2002.
(10) Tremols V, Bielsa A, Soliva JC, Raheb C, Carmona S, Tomas J,
Gispert JD, Rovira M, Fauquet J, Tobena A, Bulbena A, Vilarroya O.
Differential abnormalities of the head and body of the caudate nucleus in
attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatry Research 163[3], 270278. 8-30-2008.
(11) Soliva JC, Fauquet J, Bielsa A, Rovira M, Carmona S, RamosQuiroga JA, Hilferty J, Bulbena A, Casas M, Vilarroya O. Quantitative
MR analysis of caudate abnormalities in pediatric ADHD: proposal for a
diagnostic test. Psychiatry Research 182[3], 238-243. 6-30-2010.
(12) Lopez-Larson M, Michael ES, Terry JE, Breeze JL, Hodge SM,
Tang L, Kennedy DN, Moore CM, Makris N, Caviness VS, Frazier JA.
Subcortical differences among youths with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder compared to those with bipolar disorder with and without
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Child and Adolescent
Psychopharmacology 19[1], 31-39. 2009.
(13) Liu IY, Howe M, Garrett A, Karchemskiy A, Kelley R, Alegria D,
Reiss A, Chang K. Striatal volumes in pediatric bipolar patients with and
without comorbid ADHD. Psychiatry Research 194[1], 14-20. 10-312011.
(14) Ellison-Wright I, Ellison-Wright Z, Bullmore E. Structural brain
change in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder identified by metaanalysis. BMC.Psychiatry 8, 51. 2008.
(15) Wellington TM, Semrud-Clikeman M, Gregory AL, Murphy JM,
Lancaster JL. Magnetic resonance imaging volumetric analysis of the
putamen in children with ADHD: combined type versus control.
J.Atten.Disord. 10[2], 171-180. 2006.
(16) Overmeyer S, Bullmore ET, Suckling J, Simmons A, Williams SC,
Santosh PJ, Taylor E. Distributed grey and white matter deficits in
hyperkinetic disorder: MRI evidence for anatomical abnormality in an
attentional network. Psychological Medicine 31[8], 1425-1435. 2001.
(17) Pavuluri MN, Yang S, Kamineni K, Passarotti AM, Srinivasan G,
Harral EM, Sweeney JA, Zhou XJ. Diffusion tensor imaging study of
white matter fiber tracts in pediatric bipolar disorder and attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry 65[7], 586-593. 4-12009.
(18) Davenport ND, Karatekin C, White T, Lim KO. Differential fractional
anisotropy abnormalities in adolescents with ADHD or schizophrenia.
Psychiatry Research 181[3], 193-198. 3-30-2010.

24

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
(19) Konrad K, Eickhoff SB. Is the ADHD brain wired differently? A
review on structural and functional connectivity in attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Human Brain Mapping 31[6], 904-916. 2010.
(20) Ashtari M, Kumra S, Bhaskar SL, Clarke T, Thaden E, Cervellione
KL, Rhinewine J, Kane JM, Adesman A, Milanaik R, Maytal J, Diamond
A, Szeszko P, Ardekani BA. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a
preliminary diffusion tensor imaging study. Biological Psychiatry 57[5],
448-455. 3-1-2005.
(21) Casey BJ, Epstein JN, Buhle J, Liston C, Davidson MC, Tonev ST,
Spicer J, Niogi S, Millner AJ, Reiss A, Garrett A, Hinshaw SP, Greenhill
LL, Shafritz KM, Vitolo A, Kotler LA, Jarrett MA, Glover G. Frontostriatal
connectivity and its role in cognitive control in parent-child dyads with
ADHD. American Journal of Psychiatry 164[11], 1729-1736. 2007.
(22) Rubia K, Halari R, Smith AB, Mohammed M, Scott S, Giampietro V,
Taylor E, Brammer MJ. Dissociated functional brain abnormalities of
inhibition in boys with pure conduct disorder and in boys with pure
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry
165[7], 889-897. 2008.
(23) Rubia K, Halari R, Smith AB, Mohammad M, Scott S, Brammer MJ.
Shared and disorder-specific prefrontal abnormalities in boys with pure
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder compared to boys with pure CD
during interference inhibition and attention allocation. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines 50[6], 669-678. 2009.
(24) Rubia K, Cubillo A, Smith AB, Woolley J, Heyman I, Brammer MJ.
Disorder-specific dysfunction in right inferior prefrontal cortex during two
inhibition tasks in boys with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
compared to boys with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Human Brain
Mapping 31[2], 287-299. 2010.
(25) Barkley RA, Fischer M. The unique contribution of emotional
impulsiveness to impairment in major life activities in hyperactive
children as adults. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry 49[5], 503-513. 2010.
(26) Brotman MA, Rich BA, Guyer AE, Lunsford JR, Horsey SE, Reising
MM, Thomas LA, Fromm SJ, Towbin K, Pine DS, Leibenluft E.
Amygdala activation during emotion processing of neutral faces in
children with severe mood dysregulation versus ADHD or bipolar
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry 167[1], 61-69. 2010.
(27) Passarotti AM, Sweeney JA, Pavuluri MN. Neural correlates of
response inhibition in pediatric bipolar disorder and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatry Research 181[1], 36-43. 1-30-2010.
(28) Raichle ME, Gusnard DA. Intrinsic brain activity sets the stage for
expression of motivated behavior. J Comp Neurol. 493[1], 167-176. 125-2005.
(29) Fox MD, Raichle ME. Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity
observed
with
functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging.
Nat.Rev.Neurosci. 8[9], 700-711. 2007.
(30) Fair DA, Cohen AL, Dosenbach NU, Church JA, Miezin FM, Barch
DM, Raichle ME, Petersen SE, Schlaggar BL. The maturing architecture
of the brain's default network. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 105[10], 40284032. 3-11-2008.
(31) Zhu CZ, Zang YF, Cao QJ, Yan CG, He Y, Jiang TZ, Sui MQ, Wang
YF. Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Neuroimage. 40[1], 110-120. 3-12008.
(32) Dickstein SG, Bannon K, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. The neural
correlates of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: an ALE metaanalysis. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines 47[10], 1051-1062. 2006.
(33) Hirschfeld RM, Keller MB, Panico S, Arons BS, Barlow D, Davidoff
F, Endicott J, Froom J, Goldstein M, Gorman JM, Marek RG, Maurer TA,
Meyer R, Phillips K, Ross J, Schwenk TL, Sharfstein SS, Thase ME,
Wyatt RJ. The National Depressive and Manic-Depressive Association
consensus statement on the undertreatment of depression. JAMA
277[4], 333-340. 1-22-1997.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

(34) Merikangas KR, He JP, Burstein M, Swendsen J, Avenevoli S,
Case B, Georgiades K, Heaton L, Swanson S, Olfson M. Service
utilization for lifetime mental disorders in U.S. adolescents: results of the
National Comorbidity Survey-Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 50[1], 3245. 2011.
(35) Eaton DK, Kann L, Kinchen S, Shanklin S, Ross J, Hawkins J,
Harris WA, Lowry R, McManus T, Chyen D, Lim C, Whittle L, Brener
ND, Wechsler H, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Youth risk behavior surveillance - United States, 2009. MMWR Surveill
Summ. 59[5], 1-142. 6-4-2010.
(36) Rosso IM, Cintron CM, Steingard RJ, Renshaw PF, Young AD,
Yurgelun-Todd DA. Amygdala and hippocampus volumes in pediatric
major depression. Biological Psychiatry 57[1], 21-26. 1-1-2005.
(37) MacMillan S, Szeszko PR, Moore GJ, Madden R, Lorch E, Ivey J,
Banerjee SP, Rosenberg DR. Increased amygdala: hippocampal volume
ratios associated with severity of anxiety in pediatric major depression.
Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 13[1], 65-73.
2003.
(38) Caetano SC, Fonseca M, Hatch JP, Olvera RL, Nicoletti M, Hunter
K, Lafer B, Pliszka SR, Soares JC. Medial temporal lobe abnormalities
in pediatric unipolar depression. Neuroscience Letters 427[3], 142-147.
11-12-2007.
(39) Fallucca E, MacMaster FP, Haddad J, Easter P, Dick R, May G,
Stanley JA, Rix C, Rosenberg DR. Distinguishing between major
depressive disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder in children by
measuring regional cortical thickness. Archives of General Psychiatry
68[5], 527-533. 2011.
(40) Nolan CL, Moore GJ, Madden R, Farchione T, Bartoi M, Lorch E,
Stewart CM, Rosenberg DR. Prefrontal cortical volume in childhoodonset major depression: preliminary findings. Archives of General
Psychiatry 59[2], 173-179. 2002.
(41) Cullen KR, Klimes-Dougan B, Muetzel R, Mueller BA, Camchong J,
Houri A, Kurma S, Lim KO. Altered white matter microstructure in
adolescents with major depression: a preliminary study. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 49[2], 173-183.
2010.
(42) Huang H, Fan X, Williamson DE, Rao U. White matter changes in
healthy adolescents at familial risk for unipolar depression: a diffusion
tensor imaging study. Neuropsychopharmacology 36[3], 684-691. 2011.
(43) Thomas KM, Drevets WC, Dahl RE, Ryan ND, Birmaher B, Eccard
CH, Axelson D, Whalen PJ, Casey BJ. Amygdala response to fearful
faces in anxious and depressed children. Archives of General Psychiatry
58[11], 1057-1063. 2001.
(44) Roberson-Nay R, McClure EB, Monk CS, Nelson EE, Guyer AE,
Fromm SJ, Charney DS, Leibenluft E, Blair J, Ernst M, Pine DS.
Increased Amygdala Activity During Successful Memory Encoding in
Adolescent Major Depressive Disorder: An fMRI Study. Biological
Psychiatry 60[9], 966-973. 4-4-2006.
(45) Beesdo K, Lau JY, Guyer AE, McClure-Tone EB, Monk CS, Nelson
EE, Fromm SJ, Goldwin MA, Wittchen HU, Leibenluft E, Ernst M, Pine
DS. Common and distinct amygdala-function perturbations in depressed
vs anxious adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry 66[3], 275-285.
2009.
(46) Forbes EE, Olino TM, Ryan ND, Birmaher B, Axelson D, Moyles
DL, Dahl RE. Reward-related brain function as a predictor of treatment
response in adolescents with major depressive disorder. Cogn
Affect.Behav.Neurosci. 10[1], 107-118. 2010.
(47) Krueger RF. The structure of common mental disorders. Archives of
General Psychiatry 56[10], 921-926. 1999.
(48) Vollebergh WA, Iedema J, Bijl RV, de Graaf R, Smit F, Ormel J.
The structure and stability of common mental disorders: the NEMESIS
study. Archives of General Psychiatry 58[6], 597-603. 2001.

25

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
(49) Slade T, Watson D. The structure of common DSM-IV and ICD-10
mental disorders in the Australian general population. Psychological
Medicine 36[11], 1593-1600. 2006.
(50) Dugas MJ, Anderson KG, Deschenes SS, Donegan E. Generalized
anxiety disorder publications: where do we stand a decade later?
J.Anxiety.Disord. 24[7], 780-784. 2010.
(51) De Bellis MD, Casey BJ, Dahl RE, Birmaher B, Williamson DE,
Thomas KM, Axelson DA, Frustaci K, Boring AM, Hall J, Ryan ND. A
pilot study of amygdala volumes in pediatric generalized anxiety
disorder. Biological Psychiatry 48[1], 51-57. 7-1-2000.
(52) Milham MP, Nugent AC, Drevets WC, Dickstein DS, Leibenluft E,
Ernst M, Charney D, Pine DS. Selective reduction in amygdala volume
in pediatric anxiety disorders: a voxel-based morphometry investigation.
Biological Psychiatry 57[9], 961-966. 5-1-2005.
(53) Monk CS, Telzer EH, Mogg K, Bradley BP, Mai X, Louro HM, Chen
G, McClure-Tone EB, Ernst M, Pine DS. Amygdala and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex activation to masked angry faces in children and
adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry 65[5], 568-576. 2008.
(54) Lau JY, Goldman D, Buzas B, Fromm SJ, Guyer AE, Hodgkinson
C, Monk CS, Nelson EE, Shen PH, Pine DS, Ernst M. Amygdala
function and 5-HTT gene variants in adolescent anxiety and major
depressive disorder. Biological Psychiatry 65[4], 349-355. 2-15-2009.
(55) McClure EB, Adler A, Monk CS, Cameron J, Smith S, Nelson EE,
Leibenluft E, Ernst M, Pine DS. fMRI predictors of treatment outcome in
pediatric anxiety disorders. Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 9-14-2006.
(56) Maslowsky J, Mogg K, Bradley BP, McClure-Tone E, Ernst M, Pine
DS, Monk CS. A preliminary investigation of neural correlates of
treatment in adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of
Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 20[2], 105-111. 2010.
(57) Blader JC, Carlson GA. Increased Rates of Bipolar Disorder
Diagnoses Among U.S. Child, Adolescent, and Adult Inpatients, 19962004. Biological Psychiatry 62[2], 107-114. 2-15-2007.
(58) Moreno C, Laje G, Blanco C, Jiang H, Schmidt AB, Olfson M.
National trends in the outpatient diagnosis and treatment of bipolar
disorder in youth. Archives of General Psychiatry 64[9], 1032-1039.
2007.
(59) Holtmann M, Duketis E, Poustka L, Zepf FD, Poustka F, Bolte S.
Bipolar disorder in children and adolescents in Germany: national trends
in the rates of inpatients, 2000-2007. Bipolar.Disord. 12[2], 155-163.
2010.
(60) Blumberg HP, Kaufman J, Martin A, Whiteman R, Zhang JH, Gore
JC, Charney DS, Krystal JH, Peterson BS. Amygdala and hippocampal
volumes in adolescents and adults with bipolar disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry 60[12], 1201-1208. 2003.
(61) DelBello MP, Zimmerman ME, Mills NP, Getz GE, Strakowski SM.
Magnetic resonance imaging analysis of amygdala and other subcortical
brain regions in adolescents with bipolar disorder. Bipolar.Disord. 6[1],
43-52. 2004.
(62) Chen BK, Sassi R, Axelson D, Hatch JP, Sanches M, Nicoletti M,
Brambilla P, Keshavan MS, Ryan ND, Birmaher B, Soares JC. Crosssectional study of abnormal amygdala development in adolescents and
young adults with bipolar disorder. Biological Psychiatry 56[6], 399-405.
9-15-2004.
(63) Blumberg HP, Fredericks CA, Wang F, Kalmar JH, Spencer L,
Papademetris X, Pittman B, Martin A, Peterson BS, Fulbright RK,
Krystal JH. Preliminary evidence for persistent abnormalities in
amygdala volumes in adolescents and young adults with bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disorders 7[6], 570-576. 2005.
(64) Chang K, Karchemskiy A, Barnea-Goraly N, Garrett A, Simeonova
DI, Reiss A. Reduced amygdalar gray matter volume in familial pediatric
bipolar disorder. J Am Acad.Child Adolesc.Psychiatry 44[6], 565-573.
2005.
(65) Dickstein DP, Milham MP, Nugent AC, Drevets WC, Charney DS,
Pine DS, Leibenluft E. Frontotemporal alterations in pediatric bipolar

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

disorder: results of a voxel-based morphometry study. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 62[7], 734-741. 2005.
(66) Kalmar JH, Wang F, Chepenik LG, Womer FY, Jones MM, Pittman
B, Shah MP, Martin A, Constable RT, Blumberg HP. Relation between
amygdala structure and function in adolescents with bipolar disorder.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
48[6], 636-642. 2009.
(67) Frazier JA, Hodge SM, Breeze JL, Giuliano AJ, Terry JE, Moore
CM, Kennedy DN, Lopez-Larson MP, Caviness VS, Seidman LJ,
Zablotsky B, Makris N. Diagnostic and sex effects on limbic volumes in
early-onset bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin
34[1], 37-46. 2008.
(68) Chiu S, Widjaja F, Bates ME, Voelbel GT, Pandina G, Marble J,
Blank JA, Day J, Brule N, Hendren RL. Anterior cingulate volume in
pediatric bipolar disorder and autism. Journal of Affective Disorders
105[1-3], 93-99. 2008.
(69) Frazier JA, Breeze JL, Papadimitriou G, Kennedy DN, Hodge SM,
Moore CM, Howard JD, Rohan MP, Caviness VS, Makris N. White
matter abnormalities in children with and at risk for bipolar disorder.
Bipolar.Disord. 9[8], 799-809. 2007.
(70) Leibenluft E, Charney DS, Towbin KE, Bhangoo RK, Pine DS.
Defining clinical phenotypes of juvenile mania. American Journal of
Psychiatry 160[3], 430-437. 2003.
(71) Pavuluri MN, O'Connor MM, Harral E, Sweeney JA. Affective neural
circuitry during facial emotion processing in pediatric bipolar disorder.
Biological Psychiatry 62[2], 158-167. 7-15-2007.
(72) Dickstein DP, Rich BA, Roberson-Nay R, Berghorst L, Vinton D,
Pine DS, Leibenluft E. Neural activation during encoding of emotional
faces in pediatric bipolar disorder. Bipolar.Disord. 9[7], 679-692. 2007.
(73) Thomas LA, Bones BL, Milch HS, Lindstrom KM, Reynolds RC,
Marsh AA, Blair RJR, Pine DS, Leibenluft E. Neural engagement to
emotinal faces: Bipolar disorder differs from controls and severe mood
dysregulation. Development and Psychopathology In Press . 2011.
(74) Passarotti AM, Sweeney JA, Pavuluri MN. Differential engagement
of cognitive and affective neural systems in pediatric bipolar disorder
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society 16[1], 106-117. 2010.
(75) Passarotti AM, Sweeney JA, Pavuluri MN. Emotion processing
influences working memory circuits in pediatric bipolar disorder and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 49[10], 1064-1080. 2010.
(76) Chang KD, Wagner C, Garrett A, Howe M, Reiss A. A preliminary
functional magnetic resonance imaging study of prefrontal-amygdalar
activation changes in adolescents with bipolar depression treated with
lamotrigine. Bipolar.Disord. 10[3], 426-431. 2008.
(77) Pavuluri MN, Passarotti AM, Parnes SA, Fitzgerald JM, Sweeney
JA. A pharmacological functional magnetic resonance imaging study
probing the interface of cognitive and emotional brain systems in
pediatric bipolar disorder. Journal of Child and Adolescent
Psychopharmacology 20[5], 395-406. 2010.
(78) Pavuluri MN, Passarotti AM, Harral EM, Sweeney JA. Enhanced
prefrontal function with pharmacotherapy on a response inhibition task in
adolescent bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 71[11], 15261534. 2010.
(79) Pavuluri MN, Passarotti AM, Mohammed T, Carbray JA, Sweeney
JA. Enhanced working and verbal memory after lamotrigine treatment in
pediatric bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord. 12[2], 213-220. 2010.
(80) Pavuluri MN, Passarotti AM, Lu LH, Carbray JA, Sweeney JA.
Double-blind randomized trial of risperidone versus divalproex in
pediatric bipolar disorder: fMRI outcomes. Psychiatry Research 193[1],
28-37. 7-30-2011.
(81) Pavuluri MN, Passarotti AM, Fitzgerald JM, Wegbreit E, Sweeney
JA. Risperidone and Divalproex Differentially ENgage the Fronto-StriatoTemporal Circuitry in Pediatric Mania: A Pharmacological fMRI Study.

26

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry In
Press. 2011.
(82) Pavuluri MN, Ellis JA, Wegbreit E, Passarotti AM, Stevens MC.
Pharmacotherapy impacts functional connectivity among affective
circuits during response inhibition in pediatric mania. Behavioural Brain
Research 226[2], 493-503. 1-15-2012.
(83) Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders - Autism and
Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 14 Sites, United States,
2008. MMWR Surveill Summ. 61[SS-03], 1-19. 3-30-2012.
(84) Minshew NJ, Williams DL. The new neurobiology of autism: cortex,
connectivity, and neuronal organization. Archives of Neurology 64[7],
945-950. 2007.
(85) Via E, Radua J, Cardoner N, Happe F, Mataix-Cols D. Metaanalysis of gray matter abnormalities in autism spectrum disorder:
should Asperger disorder be subsumed under a broader umbrella of
autistic spectrum disorder? Archives of General Psychiatry 68[4], 409418. 2011.
(86) Piven J, Arndt S, Bailey J, Andreasen N. Regional brain
enlargement in autism: a magnetic resonance imaging study. J Am
Acad.Child Adolesc.Psychiatry 35[4], 530-536. 1996.
(87) Courchesne E, Carper R, Akshoomoff N. Evidence of brain
overgrowth in the first year of life in autism. JAMA 290[3], 337-344. 7-162003.
(88) Hazlett HC, Poe M, Gerig G, Smith RG, Provenzale J, Ross A,
Gilmore J, Piven J. Magnetic resonance imaging and head
circumference study of brain size in autism: birth through age 2 years.
Archives of General Psychiatry 62[12], 1366-1376. 2005.
(89) Redcay E, Courchesne E. When is the brain enlarged in autism? A
meta-analysis of all brain size reports. Biological Psychiatry 58[1], 1-9.
7-1-2005.
(90) Webb SJ, Nalty T, Munson J, Brock C, Abbott R, Dawson G. Rate
of head circumference growth as a function of autism diagnosis and
history of autistic regression. Journal of Child Neurology 22[10], 11821190. 2007.
(91) Courchesne E, Mouton PR, Calhoun ME, Semendeferi K, AhrensBarbeau C, Hallet MJ, Barnes CC, Pierce K. Neuron number and size in
prefrontal cortex of children with autism. JAMA 306[18], 2001-2010. 119-2011.
(92) Courchesne E, Campbell K, Solso S. Brain growth across the life
span in autism: age-specific changes in anatomical pathology. Brain
Research 1380, 138-145. 3-22-2011.
(93) Kaufmann WE, Cooper KL, Mostofsky SH, Capone GT, Kates WR,
Newschaffer CJ, Bukelis I, Stump MH, Jann AE, Lanham DC. Specificity
of cerebellar vermian abnormalities in autism: a quantitative magnetic
resonance imaging study. Journal of Child Neurology 18[7], 463-470.
2003.
(94) Boger-Megiddo I, Shaw DW, Friedman SD, Sparks BF, Artru AA,
Giedd JN, Dawson G, Dager SR. Corpus callosum morphometrics in
young children with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 36[6], 733-739. 2006.
(95) Petropoulos H, Friedman SD, Shaw DW, Artru AA, Dawson G,
Dager SR. Gray matter abnormalities in autism spectrum disorder
revealed by T2 relaxation. Neurology 67[4], 632-636. 8-22-2006.
(96) Herbert MR, Ziegler DA, Makris N, Filipek PA, Kemper TL,
Normandin JJ, Sanders HA, Kennedy DN, Caviness VS, Jr. Localization
of white matter volume increase in autism and developmental language
disorder. Annals of Neurology 55[4], 530-540. 2004.
(97) Herbert MR, Ziegler DA, Deutsch CK, O'Brien LM, Kennedy DN,
Filipek PA, Bakardjiev AI, Hodgson J, Takeoka M, Makris N, Caviness
VS, Jr. Brain asymmetries in autism and developmental language
disorder: a nested whole-brain analysis. Brain 128[Pt 1], 213-226. 2005.
(98) Voelbel GT, Bates ME, Buckman JF, Pandina G, Hendren RL.
Caudate nucleus volume and cognitive performance: Are they related in
childhood psychopathology? Biological Psychiatry 60[9], 942-950. 11-12006.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

(99) Mostofsky SH, Burgess MP, Gidley Larson JC. Increased motor
cortex white matter volume predicts motor impairment in autism. Brain
130[Pt 8], 2117-2122. 2007.
(100) Brieber S, Neufang S, Bruning N, Kamp-Becker I, Remschmidt H,
Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Fink GR, Konrad K. Structural brain
abnormalities in adolescents with autism spectrum disorder and patients
with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines 48[12], 1251-1258. 2007.
(101) Akshoomoff N, Lord C, Lincoln AJ, Courchesne RY, Carper RA,
Townsend J, Courchesne E. Outcome classification of preschool
children with autism spectrum disorders using MRI brain measures.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
43[3], 349-357. 2004.
(102) Jiao Y, Chen R, Ke X, Chu K, Lu Z, Herskovits EH. Predictive
models of autism spectrum disorder based on brain regional cortical
thickness. Neuroimage. 50[2], 589-599. 4-1-2010.
(103) Jiao Y, Chen R, Ke X, Cheng L, Chu K, Lu Z, Herskovits EH.
Predictive models for subtypes of autism spectrum disorder based on
single-nucleotide polymorphisms and magnetic resonance imaging.
Adv.Med.Sci. 56[2], 334-342. 2011.
(104) Lotspeich LJ, Kwon H, Schumann CM, Fryer SL, Goodlin-Jones
BL, Buonocore MH, Lammers CR, Amaral DG, Reiss AL. Investigation
of neuroanatomical differences between autism and Asperger
syndrome. Archives of General Psychiatry 61[3], 291-298. 2004.
(105) Schumann CM, Hamstra J, Goodlin-Jones BL, Lotspeich LJ, Kwon
H, Buonocore MH, Lammers CR, Reiss AL, Amaral DG. The amygdala
is enlarged in children but not adolescents with autism; the hippocampus
is enlarged at all ages. Journal of Neuroscience 24[28], 6392-6401. 714-2004.
(106) Scott JA, Schumann CM, Goodlin-Jones BL, Amaral DG. A
comprehensive volumetric analysis of the cerebellum in children and
adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. Autism Res. 2[5], 246-257.
2009.
(107) Schumann CM, Barnes CC, Lord C, Courchesne E. Amygdala
enlargement in toddlers with autism related to severity of social and
communication impairments. Biological Psychiatry 66[10], 942-949. 1115-2009.
(108) Malisza KL, Clancy C, Shiloff D, Holden J, Jones C, Paulson K, Yu
DC, Summers R, Chudley AE. Functional magnetic resonance imaging
of facial information processing in children with autistic disorder,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and typically developing controls.
Int.J.Adolesc.Med.Health 23[3], 269-277. 2011.
(109) Christakou A, Murphy CM, Chantiluke K, Cubillo AI, Smith AB,
Giampietro V, Daly E, Ecker C, Robertson D, MRC AIMS consortium,
Murphy DG, Rubia K. Disorder-specific functional abnormalities during
sustained attention in youth with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD) and with Autism. Molecular Psychiatry . 1-31-2012.
(110) Kaiser MD, Hudac CM, Shultz S, Lee SM, Cheung C, Berken AM,
Deen B, Pitskel NB, Sugrue DR, Voos AC, Saulnier CA, Ventola P, Wolf
JM, Klin A, Vander Wyk BC, Pelphrey KA. Neural signatures of autism.
Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 107[49], 21223-21228. 12-7-2010.
(111) Greimel E, Schulte-Ruther M, Kircher T, Kamp-Becker I,
Remschmidt H, Fink GR, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Konrad K. Neural
mechanisms of empathy in adolescents with autism spectrum disorder
and their fathers. Neuroimage. 49[1], 1055-1065. 1-1-2010.
(112) Lai G, Schneider HD, Schwarzenberger JC, Hirsch J. Speech
stimulation during functional MR imaging as a potential indicator of
autism. Radiology 260[2], 521-530. 2011.
(113) Lange N, Dubray MB, Lee JE, Froimowitz MP, Froehlich A, Adluru
N, Wright B, Ravichandran C, Fletcher PT, Bigler ED, Alexander AL,
Lainhart JE. Atypical diffusion tensor hemispheric asymmetry in autism.
Autism Res. 3[6], 350-358. 2010.
(114) Barnea-Goraly N, Lotspeich LJ, Reiss AL. Similar white matter
aberrations in children with autism and their unaffected siblings: a

27

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
diffusion tensor imaging study using tract-based spatial statistics.
Archives of General Psychiatry 67[10], 1052-1060. 2010.
(115) Ingalhalikar M, Parker D, Bloy L, Roberts TP, Verma R. Diffusion
based abnormality markers of pathology: toward learned diagnostic
prediction of ASD. Neuroimage. 57[3], 918-927. 8-1-2011.

References
1. Goldman, D., G. Oroszi, and F. Ducci, The genetics of addictions:
uncovering the genes. Nat Rev Genet, 2005. 6(7): p. 521-32.
2. Pfefferbaum, A., E. Adalsteinsson, and E.V. Sullivan, Supratentorial
profile of white matter microstructural integrity in recovering alcoholic
men and women. Biol Psychiatry, 2006. 59(4): p. 364-72.
3. Sullivan, E.V., et al., Contribution of alcohol abuse to cerebellar
volume deficits in men with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2000.
57(9): p. 894-902.
4. Sullivan, E.V., et al., Anterior hippocampal volume deficits in
nonamnesic, aging chronic alcoholics. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 1995.
19(1): p. 110-22.
5. Agartz, I., et al., Hippocampal volume in patients with alcohol
dependence. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 1999. 56(4): p. 356-63.
6. Laakso, M.P., et al., A volumetric MRI study of the hippocampus in
type 1 and 2 alcoholism. Behav Brain Res, 2000. 109(2): p. 177-86.
7. Makris, N., et al., Cortical thickness abnormalities in cocaine
addiction--a reflection of both drug use and a pre-existing disposition to
drug abuse? Neuron, 2008. 60(1): p. 174-88.
8. Schulte, T., et al., Neurocircuitry of emotion and cognition in
alcoholism: contributions from white matter fiber tractography. Dialogues
Clin Neurosci, 2011. 12(4): p. 554-60.
9. Duka, T., et al., Unique brain areas associated with abstinence control
are damaged in multiply detoxified alcoholics. Biol Psychiatry, 2011.
70(6): p. 545-52.
10. Braus, D.F., et al., Alcohol-associated stimuli activate the ventral
striatum in abstinent alcoholics. J Neural Transm, 2001. 108(7): p. 88794.
11. George, M.S., et al., Activation of prefrontal cortex and anterior
thalamus in alcoholic subjects on exposure to alcohol-specific cues.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2001. 58(4): p. 345-52.
12. Grusser, S.M., et al., Cue-induced activation of the striatum and
medial prefrontal cortex is associated with subsequent relapse in
abstinent alcoholics. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 2004. 175(3): p. 296302.
13. Myrick, H., et al., Effect of naltrexone and ondansetron on alcohol
cue-induced activation of the ventral striatum in alcohol-dependent
people. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2008. 65(4): p. 466-75.
14. Mann, K., et al., Searching for responders to acamprosate and
naltrexone in alcoholism treatment: rationale and design of the
PREDICT study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 2009. 33(4): p. 674-83.
15. Martinez, D. and R. Narendran, Imaging neurotransmitter release by
drugs of abuse, in Behavioral Neuroscience of Drug Addiction, D.W. Self
and J.K. Staley, Editors. 2009, Springer-Verlag: Berlin. p. 219-245.
16. Heinz, A., et al., Correlation between dopamine D(2) receptors in the
ventral striatum and central processing of alcohol cues and craving. Am
J Psychiatry, 2004. 161(10): p. 1783-9.
17. Martinez, D., et al., Alcohol dependence is associated with blunted
dopamine transmission in the ventral striatum. Biol Psychiatry, 2005.
58(10): p. 779-86.
18. Volkow, N.D., et al., Profound decreases in dopamine release in
striatum in detoxified alcoholics: possible orbitofrontal involvement. J
Neurosci, 2007. 27(46): p. 12700-6.
19. Laine, T.P., et al., Dopamine transporter density and novelty seeking
among alcoholics. J Addict Dis, 2001. 20(4): p. 91-6.
20. Tiihonen, J., et al., Altered striatal dopamine re-uptake site densities
in habitually violent and non-violent alcoholics. Nat Med, 1995. 1(7): p.
654-7.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

21. Brown, A.K., et al., PET [11C]DASB imaging of serotonin
transporters in patients with alcoholism. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 2007.
31(1): p. 28-32.
22. Heinz, A., et al., Reduced central serotonin transporters in
alcoholism. Am J Psychiatry, 1998. 155(11): p. 1544-9.
23. Szabo, Z., et al., Positron emission tomography imaging of the
serotonin transporter in subjects with a history of alcoholism. Biol
Psychiatry, 2004. 55(7): p. 766-71.
24. Heinz, A., et al., Correlation of alcohol craving with striatal dopamine
synthesis capacity and D2/3 receptor availability: a combined
[18F]DOPA and [18F]DMFP PET study in detoxified alcoholic patients.
Am J Psychiatry, 2005. 162(8): p. 1515-20.
25. Tiihonen, J., et al., Striatal presynaptic dopamine function in type 1
alcoholics measured with positron emission tomography. Mol Psychiatry,
1998. 3(2): p. 156-61.
26. Bencherif, B., et al., Mu-opioid receptor binding measured by
[11C]carfentanil positron emission tomography is related to craving and
mood in alcohol dependence. Biol Psychiatry, 2004. 55(3): p. 255-62.
27. Heinz, A., et al., Correlation of stable elevations in striatal mu-opioid
receptor availability in detoxified alcoholic patients with alcohol craving:
a positron emission tomography study using carbon 11-labeled
carfentanil. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2005. 62(1): p. 57-64.
28. Lingford-Hughes, A.R., et al., GABA-benzodiazepine receptor
function in alcohol dependence: a combined 11C-flumazenil PET and
pharmacodynamic study. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 2005. 180(4): p.
595-606.
29. Staley, J.K., et al., Cortical gamma-aminobutyric acid type Abenzodiazepine receptors in recovery from alcohol dependence:
relationship to features of alcohol dependence and cigarette smoking.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2005. 62(8): p. 877-88.
30. Andrews, M.M., et al., Individuals family history positive for
alcoholism show functional magnetic resonance imaging differences in
reward sensitivity that are related to impulsivity factors. Biol Psychiatry,
2011. 69(7): p. 675-83.
31. Heitzeg, M.M., et al., Affective circuitry and risk for alcoholism in late
adolescence: differences in frontostriatal responses between vulnerable
and resilient children of alcoholic parents. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 2008.
32(3): p. 414-26.
32. Volkow, N.D., et al., High levels of dopamine D2 receptors in
unaffected members of alcoholic families: possible protective factors.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2006. 63(9): p. 999-1008.
33. Liu, H., et al., Frontal and cingulate gray matter volume reduction in
heroin dependence: optimized voxel-based morphometry. Psychiatry
Clin Neurosci, 2009. 63(4): p. 563-8.
34. Liu, H., et al., Disrupted white matter integrity in heroin dependence:
a controlled study utilizing diffusion tensor imaging. Am J Drug Alcohol
Abuse, 2008. 34(5): p. 562-75.
35. Weber, W., et al., Toxic spongiform leucoencephalopathy after
inhaling heroin vapour. Eur Radiol, 1998. 8(5): p. 749-55.
36. Liu, J., et al., Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic heroin
users: an fMRI study. Neurosci Lett, 2009. 460(1): p. 72-7.
37. Ma, N., et al., Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain
connectivity. Neuroimage, 2011. 49(1): p. 738-44.
38. Yuan, K., et al., Altered small-world brain functional networks and
duration of heroin use in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals.
Neurosci Lett, 2011. 477(1): p. 37-42.
39. Fu, L.P., et al., Impaired response inhibition function in abstinent
heroin dependents: an fMRI study. Neurosci Lett, 2008. 438(3): p. 3226.
40. Xiao, Z., et al., Thirsty heroin addicts show different fMRI activations
when exposed to water-related and drug-related cues. Drug Alcohol
Depend, 2006. 83(2): p. 157-62.
41. Yang, Z., et al., Dynamic neural responses to cue-reactivity
paradigms in heroin-dependent users: an fMRI study. Hum Brain Mapp,
2009. 30(3): p. 766-75.

28

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
42. Langleben, D.D., et al., Acute effect of methadone maintenance
dose on brain FMRI response to heroin-related cues. Am J Psychiatry,
2008. 165(3): p. 390-4.
43. Upadhyay, J., et al., Alterations in brain structure and functional
connectivity in prescription opioid-dependent patients. Brain, 2011.
133(Pt 7): p. 2098-114.
44. Wang, G.J., et al., Dopamine D2 receptor availability in opiatedependent subjects before and after naloxone-precipitated withdrawal.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 1997. 16(2): p. 174-82.
45. Zijlstra, F., et al., Striatal dopamine D2 receptor binding and
dopamine release during cue-elicited craving in recently abstinent
opiate-dependent males. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol, 2008. 18(4): p.
262-70.
46. Zubieta, J., et al., Buprenorphine-induced changes in mu-opioid
receptor availability in male heroin-dependent volunteers: a preliminary
study. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2000. 23(3): p. 326-34.
47. Alia-Klein, N., et al., Gene x disease interaction on orbitofrontal gray
matter in cocaine addiction. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2011. 68(3): p. 28394.
48. Ersche, K.D., et al., Abnormal structure of frontostriatal brain
systems is associated with aspects of impulsivity and compulsivity in
cocaine dependence. Brain, 2011. 134(Pt 7): p. 2013-24.
49. Hanlon, C.A., et al., Elevated gray and white matter densities in
cocaine abstainers compared to current users. Psychopharmacology
(Berl), 2011.
50. Meyer-Lindenberg, A., et al., Neural mechanisms of genetic risk for
impulsivity and violence in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2006.
103(16): p. 6269-74.
51. Volkow, N.D., et al., Addiction: decreased reward sensitivity and
increased expectation sensitivity conspire to overwhelm the brain's
control circuit. Bioessays, 2010. 32(9): p. 748-55.
52. Gu, H., et al., Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic
cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity.
Neuroimage, 2011. 53(2): p. 593-601.
53. Camchong, J., et al., Frontal hyperconnectivity related to discounting
and reversal learning in cocaine subjects. Biol Psychiatry, 2011. 69(11):
p. 1117-23.
54. Childress, A.R., et al., Limbic activation during cue-induced cocaine
craving. Am J Psychiatry, 1999. 156(1): p. 11-8.
55. Garavan, H., et al., Cue-induced cocaine craving: neuroanatomical
specificity for drug users and drug stimuli. Am J Psychiatry, 2000.
157(11): p. 1789-98.
56. Grant, S., et al., Activation of memory circuits during cue-elicited
cocaine craving. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1996. 93(21): p. 12040-5.
57. Kilts, C.D., et al., The neural correlates of cue-induced craving in
cocaine-dependent women. Am J Psychiatry, 2004. 161(2): p. 233-41.
58. Maas, L.C., et al., Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human
brain activation during cue-induced cocaine craving. Am J Psychiatry,
1998. 155(1): p. 124-6.
59. Wexler, B.E., et al., Functional magnetic resonance imaging of
cocaine craving. Am J Psychiatry, 2001. 158(1): p. 86-95.
60. Wilcox, C.E., et al., Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto-striatal
functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders. Drug Alcohol Depend,
2011. 115(1-2): p. 137-44.
61. Brewer, J.A., et al., Pretreatment brain activation during stroop task
is associated with outcomes in cocaine-dependent patients. Biol
Psychiatry, 2008. 64(11): p. 998-1004.
62. Kosten, T.R., et al., Cue-induced brain activity changes and relapse
in cocaine-dependent patients. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2006. 31(3):
p. 644-50.
63. Jia, Z., et al., An initial study of neural responses to monetary
incentives as related to treatment outcome in cocaine dependence. Biol
Psychiatry, 2011. 70(6): p. 553-60.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

64. Martinez, D., et al., Cocaine dependence and d2 receptor availability
in the functional subdivisions of the striatum: relationship with cocaineseeking behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2004. 29(6): p. 1190-202.
65. Volkow, N.D., et al., Decreased dopamine D2 receptor availability is
associated with reduced frontal metabolism in cocaine abusers.
Synapse, 1993. 14(2): p. 169-77.
66. Volkow, N.D., et al., Effects of chronic cocaine abuse on
postsynaptic dopamine receptors. Am J Psychiatry, 1990. 147(6): p.
719-24.
67. Volkow, N.D., et al., Decreased striatal dopaminergic
responsiveness in detoxified cocaine-dependent subjects. Nature, 1997.
386(6627): p. 830-3.
68. Nader, M.A., et al., PET imaging of dopamine D2 receptors during
chronic cocaine self-administration in monkeys. Nat Neurosci, 2006.
9(8): p. 1050-6.
69. Volkow, N.D., J.S. Fowler, and G.J. Wang, Imaging studies on the
role of dopamine in cocaine reinforcement and addiction in humans. J
Psychopharmacol, 1999. 13(4): p. 337-45.
70. Volkow, N.D., et al., Relationship between blockade of dopamine
transporters by oral methylphenidate and the increases in extracellular
dopamine: therapeutic implications. Synapse, 2002. 43(3): p. 181-7.
71. Martinez, D., et al., Amphetamine-induced dopamine release:
markedly blunted in cocaine dependence and predictive of the choice to
self-administer cocaine. Am J Psychiatry, 2007. 164(4): p. 622-9.
72. Volkow, N.D., et al., Cocaine cues and dopamine in dorsal striatum:
mechanism of craving in cocaine addiction. J Neurosci, 2006. 26(24): p.
6583-8.
73. Wong, D.F., et al., Increased occupancy of dopamine receptors in
human
striatum
during
cue-elicited
cocaine
craving.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2006. 31(12): p. 2716-27.
74. Boileau, I., et al., Modeling sensitization to stimulants in humans: an
[11C]raclopride/positron emission tomography study in healthy men.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2006. 63(12): p. 1386-95.
75. Crits-Christoph, P., et al., Dopamine transporter levels in cocaine
dependent subjects. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2008. 98(1-2): p. 70-6.
76. Jacobsen, L.K., et al., Elevated central serotonin transporter binding
availability in acutely abstinent cocaine-dependent patients. Am J
Psychiatry, 2000. 157(7): p. 1134-40.
77. Zubieta, J.K., et al., Increased mu opioid receptor binding detected
by PET in cocaine-dependent men is associated with cocaine craving.
Nat Med, 1996. 2(11): p. 1225-9.
78. Gorelick, D.A., et al., Imaging brain mu-opioid receptors in abstinent
cocaine users: time course and relation to cocaine craving. Biol
Psychiatry, 2005. 57(12): p. 1573-82.
79. Gorelick, D.A., et al., Brain mu-opioid receptor binding: relationship
to
relapse
to
cocaine
use
after
monitored
abstinence.
Psychopharmacology (Berl), 2008. 200(4): p. 475-86.
80. Chang, L., et al., Enlarged striatum in abstinent methamphetamine
abusers: a possible compensatory response. Biol Psychiatry, 2005.
57(9): p. 967-74.
81. Jernigan, T.L., et al., Effects of methamphetamine dependence and
HIV infection on cerebral morphology. Am J Psychiatry, 2005. 162(8): p.
1461-72.
82. Chang, L., et al., Structural and metabolic brain changes in the
striatum associated with methamphetamine abuse. Addiction, 2007. 102
Suppl 1: p. 16-32.
83. Orikabe, L., et al., Reduced amygdala and hippocampal volumes in
patients with methamphetamine psychosis. Schizophr Res, 2011.
84. Thompson, P.M., et al., Structural abnormalities in the brains of
human subjects who use methamphetamine. J Neurosci, 2004. 24(26):
p. 6028-36.
85. Nakama, H., et al., Methamphetamine users show greater than
normal age-related cortical gray matter loss. Addiction, 2011. 106(8): p.
1474-83.

29

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
86. Daumann, J., et al., Medial prefrontal gray matter volume reductions
in users of amphetamine-type stimulants revealed by combined tractbased spatial statistics and voxel-based morphometry. Neuroimage,
2011. 54(2): p. 794-801.
87. London, E.D., et al., Cerebral metabolic dysfunction and impaired
vigilance in recently abstinent methamphetamine abusers. Biol
Psychiatry, 2005. 58(10): p. 770-8.
88. Paulus, M.P., et al., Decision making by methamphetaminedependent subjects is associated with error-rate-independent decrease
in prefrontal and parietal activation. Biol Psychiatry, 2003. 53(1): p. 6574.
89. Salo, R., et al., Impaired prefrontal cortical function and disrupted
adaptive cognitive control in methamphetamine abusers: a functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. Biol Psychiatry, 2009. 65(8): p. 7069.
90. Kim, Y.T., et al., Alterations in cortical activity of male
methamphetamine abusers performing an empathy task: fMRI study.
Hum Psychopharmacol, 2011. 25(1): p. 63-70.
91. Payer, D.E., M.D. Lieberman, and E.D. London, Neural correlates of
affect processing and aggression in methamphetamine dependence.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2011. 68(3): p. 271-82.
92. Ghahremani, D.G., et al., Effect of modafinil on learning and taskrelated brain activity in methamphetamine-dependent and healthy
individuals. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2011. 36(5): p. 950-9.
93. Paulus, M.P., S.F. Tapert, and M.A. Schuckit, Neural activation
patterns of methamphetamine-dependent subjects during decision
making predict relapse. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2005. 62(7): p. 761-8.
94. Volkow, N.D., et al., Low level of brain dopamine D2 receptors in
methamphetamine abusers: association with metabolism in the
orbitofrontal cortex. Am J Psychiatry, 2001. 158(12): p. 2015-21.
95. Lee, B., et al., Striatal dopamine d2/d3 receptor availability is
reduced in methamphetamine dependence and is linked to impulsivity. J
Neurosci, 2009. 29(47): p. 14734-40.
96. Brody, A.L., et al., Differences between smokers and nonsmokers in
regional gray matter volumes and densities. Biol Psychiatry, 2004. 55(1):
p. 77-84.
97. Gallinat, J., et al., Smoking and structural brain deficits: a volumetric
MR investigation. Eur J Neurosci, 2006. 24(6): p. 1744-50.
98. Das, D., et al., Lifetime cigarette smoking is associated with striatal
volume measures. Addict Biol, 2011.
99. Martin-Santos, R., et al., Neuroimaging in cannabis use: a
systematic review of the literature. Psychol Med, 2009. 40(3): p. 383-98.
100. Matochik, J.A., et al., Altered brain tissue composition in heavy
marijuana users. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2005. 77(1): p. 23-30.
101. Yucel, M., et al., Regional brain abnormalities associated with longterm heavy cannabis use. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2008. 65(6): p. 694-701.
102. Zubieta, J.K., et al., Regional cerebral blood flow responses to
smoking in tobacco smokers after overnight abstinence. Am J
Psychiatry, 2005. 162(3): p. 567-77.
103. Stein, E.A., et al., Nicotine-induced limbic cortical activation in the
human brain: a functional MRI study. Am J Psychiatry, 1998. 155(8): p.
1009-15.
104. Addicott, M.A., et al., Smoking withdrawal is associated with
increases in brain activation during decision making and reward
anticipation: a preliminary study. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 2011.
105. Brody, A.L., et al., Brain metabolic changes during cigarette
craving. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2002. 59(12): p. 1162-72.
106. David, S.P., et al., Effects of Acute Nicotine Abstinence on Cueelicited Ventral Striatum/Nucleus Accumbens Activation in Female
Cigarette Smokers: A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study.
Brain Imaging Behav, 2007. 1(3-4): p. 43-57.
107. Due, D.L., et al., Activation in mesolimbic and visuospatial neural
circuits elicited by smoking cues: evidence from functional magnetic
resonance imaging. Am J Psychiatry, 2002. 159(6): p. 954-60.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

108. Franklin, T.R., et al., Limbic activation to cigarette smoking cues
independent of nicotine withdrawal: a perfusion fMRI study.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2007. 32(11): p. 2301-9.
109. Wang, Z., et al., Neural substrates of abstinence-induced cigarette
cravings in chronic smokers. J Neurosci, 2007. 27(51): p. 14035-40.
110. Culbertson, C.S., et al., Effect of bupropion treatment on brain
activation induced by cigarette-related cues in smokers. Arch Gen
Psychiatry, 2011. 68(5): p. 505-15.
111. Franklin, T., et al., Effects of varenicline on smoking cue-triggered
neural and craving responses. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2011. 68(5): p. 51626.
112. Beaver, J.D., et al., The Effects of nicotine replacement on
cognitive brain activity during smoking withdrawal studied with
simultaneous fMRI/EEG. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2011. 36(9): p.
1792-800.
113. Lawrence, N.S., T.J. Ross, and E.A. Stein, Cognitive mechanisms
of nicotine on visual attention. Neuron, 2002. 36(3): p. 539-48.
114. Franklin, T.R., et al., DAT genotype modulates brain and behavioral
responses elicited by cigarette cues. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2009.
34(3): p. 717-28.
115. Janes, A.C., et al., Association between CHRNA5 genetic variation
at rs16969968 and brain reactivity to smoking images in nicotine
dependent women. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2011.
116. Mukhin, A.G., et al., Greater nicotinic acetylcholine receptor density
in smokers than in nonsmokers: a PET study with 2-18F-FA-85380. J
Nucl Med, 2008. 49(10): p. 1628-35.
117. Cosgrove, K.P., et al., beta2-Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
availability during acute and prolonged abstinence from tobacco
smoking. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2009. 66(6): p. 666-76.
118. Esterlis, I., et al., Quantification of smoking-induced occupancy of
beta2-nicotinic acetylcholine receptors: estimation of nondisplaceable
binding. J Nucl Med, 2011. 51(8): p. 1226-33.
119. Brody, A.L., et al., Smoking-induced ventral striatum dopamine
release. Am J Psychiatry, 2004. 161(7): p. 1211-8.
120. Brody, A.L., et al., Ventral striatal dopamine release in response to
smoking
a
regular
vs
a
denicotinized
cigarette.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2009. 34(2): p. 282-9.
121. Barrett, S.P., et al., The hedonic response to cigarette smoking is
proportional to dopamine release in the human striatum as measured by
positron emission tomography and [11C]raclopride. Synapse, 2004.
54(2): p. 65-71.
122. Scott, D.J., et al., Smoking modulation of mu-opioid and dopamine
D2
receptor-mediated
neurotransmission
in
humans.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2007. 32(2): p. 450-7.
123. Montgomery, A.J., et al., The effect of nicotine on striatal dopamine
release in man: A [11C]raclopride PET study. Synapse, 2007. 61(8): p.
637-45.
124. Fehr, C., et al., Association of low striatal dopamine d2 receptor
availability with nicotine dependence similar to that seen with other
drugs of abuse. Am J Psychiatry, 2008. 165(4): p. 507-14.
125. Dagher, A., et al., Reduced dopamine D1 receptor binding in the
ventral striatum of cigarette smokers. Synapse, 2001. 42(1): p. 48-53.
126. Takahashi, H., et al., Enhanced dopamine release by nicotine in
cigarette smokers: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot
study. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 2008. 11(3): p. 413-7.
127. Ray, R., et al., Human Mu Opioid Receptor (OPRM1 A118G)
polymorphism is associated with brain mu-opioid receptor binding
potential in smokers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2011. 108(22): p. 926873.
References for Cognitive Section
1. Grand JH, Caspar S, Macdonald SW. Clinical features and
multidisciplinary approaches to dementia care. J Multidiscip Healthc.
2011;4:125-47. PubMed PMID: 21655340.
2. McKeith IG. Consensus guidelines for the clinical and pathologic
diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): report of the Consortium

30

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
on DLB International Workshop. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006;9(3 Suppl):41723. PubMed PMID: 16914880.
3. McKhann GM, Knopman DS, Chertkow H, Hyman BT, Jack CR, Jr.,
Kawas CH, et al. The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease:
Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's
Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's
disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7(3):263-9. PubMed PMID:
21514250.
4. Neary D, Snowden JS, Gustafson L, Passant U, Stuss D, Black S, et
al. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a consensus on clinical
diagnostic criteria. Neurology. 1998;51(6):1546-54. PubMed PMID:
9855500.
5. O'Brien J, Ames D, Burns AS. Dementia. 4th ed. London: Hodder
Arnold; 2010. xxx, 792 p., [14] p. of plates p.
6. Albert MS, DeKosky ST, Dickson D, Dubois B, Feldman HH, Fox NC,
et al. The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer's
disease: recommendations from the National Institute on AgingAlzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for
Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7(3):270-9. PubMed
PMID: 21514249.
7. Lim A, Tsuang D, Kukull W, Nochlin D, Leverenz J, McCormick W, et
al. Clinico-neuropathological correlation of Alzheimer's disease in a
community-based case series. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1999;47(5):564-9.
PubMed PMID: 10323650.
8. Ranginwala NA, Hynan LS, Weiner MF, White CL, 3rd. Clinical criteria
for the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease: still good after all these years.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008;16(5):384-8. PubMed PMID: 18448850.
9. Schuff N, Woerner N, Boreta L, Kornfield T, Shaw LM, Trojanowski
JQ, et al. MRI of hippocampal volume loss in early Alzheimer's disease
in relation to ApoE genotype and biomarkers. Brain. 2009;132(Pt
4):1067-77. PubMed PMID: 19251758.
10. Mormino EC, Kluth JT, Madison CM, Rabinovici GD, Baker SL,
Miller BL, et al. Episodic memory loss is related to hippocampalmediated beta-amyloid deposition in elderly subjects. Brain. 2009;132(Pt
5):1310-23. PubMed PMID: 19042931.
11. Morris JC, Roe CM, Xiong C, Fagan AM, Goate AM, Holtzman DM,
et al. APOE predicts amyloid-beta but not tau Alzheimer pathology in
cognitively normal aging. Ann Neurol. 2010;67(1):122-31. PubMed
PMID: 20186853.
12. Ewers M, Sperling RA, Klunk WE, Weiner MW, Hampel H.
Neuroimaging markers for the prediction and early diagnosis of
Alzheimer's disease dementia. Trends Neurosci. 2011. PubMed PMID:
21696834.
13. McEvoy LK, Holland D, Hagler DJ, Jr., Fennema-Notestine C,
Brewer JB, Dale AM. Mild Cognitive Impairment: Baseline and
Longitudinal Structural MR Imaging Measures Improve Predictive
Prognosis. Radiology. 2011;259(3):834-43. PubMed PMID: 21471273.
14. Holland D, Brewer JB, Hagler DJ, Fennema-Notestine C, Dale AM.
Subregional neuroanatomical change as a biomarker for Alzheimer's
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106(49):20954-9. PubMed
PMID: 19996185.
15. Bouwman FH, Schoonenboom SN, van der Flier WM, van Elk EJ,
Kok A, Barkhof F, et al. CSF biomarkers and medial temporal lobe
atrophy predict dementia in mild cognitive impairment. Neurobiol Aging.
2007;28(7):1070-4. PubMed PMID: 16782233.
16. Vemuri P, Wiste HJ, Weigand SD, Shaw LM, Trojanowski JQ,
Weiner MW, et al. MRI and CSF biomarkers in normal, MCI, and AD
subjects: predicting future clinical change. Neurology. 2009;73(4):294301. PubMed PMID: 19636049.
17. Ewers M, Walsh C, Trojanowski JQ, Shaw LM, Petersen RC, Jack
CR, Jr., et al. Prediction of conversion from mild cognitive impairment to
Alzheimer's disease dementia based upon biomarkers and
neuropsychological test performance. Neurobiol Aging. 2010. PubMed
PMID: 21159408.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

18. Hampel H, Frank R, Broich K, Teipel SJ, Katz RG, Hardy J, et al.
Biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease: academic, industry and regulatory
perspectives. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010;9(7):560-74. PubMed PMID:
20592748.
19. Small GW, Bookheimer SY, Thompson PM, Cole GM, Huang SC,
Kepe V, et al. Current and future uses of neuroimaging for cognitively
impaired patients. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7(2):161-72. PubMed PMID:
18207114.
20. Nordberg A, Rinne JO, Kadir A, Langstrom B. The use of PET in
Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2010;6(2):78-87. PubMed PMID:
20139997.
21. Coleman RE. Positron emission tomography diagnosis of
Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2005;15(4):837-46, x.
PubMed PMID: 16443494.
22. Mosconi L. Brain glucose metabolism in the early and specific
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. FDG-PET studies in MCI and AD. Eur
J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2005;32(4):486-510. PubMed PMID:
15747152.
23. Jagust W, Reed B, Mungas D, Ellis W, Decarli C. What does
fluorodeoxyglucose PET imaging add to a clinical diagnosis of
dementia? Neurology. 2007;69(9):871-7. PubMed PMID: 17724289.
24. Landau SM, Harvey D, Madison CM, Reiman EM, Foster NL, Aisen
PS, et al. Comparing predictors of conversion and decline in mild
cognitive impairment. Neurology. 2010;75(3):230-8. PubMed PMID:
20592257.
25. Mosconi L, Brys M, Glodzik-Sobanska L, De Santi S, Rusinek H, de
Leon MJ. Early detection of Alzheimer's disease using neuroimaging.
Exp Gerontol. 2007;42(1-2):129-38. PubMed PMID: 16839732.
26. Jagust WJ, Landau SM, Shaw LM, Trojanowski JQ, Koeppe RA,
Reiman EM, et al. Relationships between biomarkers in aging and
dementia. Neurology. 2009;73(15):1193-9. PubMed PMID: 19822868.
27. Lowe VJ, Kemp BJ, Jack CR, Jr., Senjem M, Weigand S, Shiung M,
et al. Comparison of 18F-FDG and PiB PET in cognitive impairment. J
Nucl Med. 2009;50(6):878-86. PubMed PMID: 19443597.
28. Dukart J, Mueller K, Horstmann A, Barthel H, Moller HE, Villringer A,
et al. Combined evaluation of FDG-PET and MRI improves detection
and differentiation of dementia. PLoS One. 2011;6(3):e18111. PubMed
PMID: 21448435.
29. Foster NL, Heidebrink JL, Clark CM, Jagust WJ, Arnold SE, Barbas
NR, et al. FDG-PET improves accuracy in distinguishing frontotemporal
dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Brain. 2007;130(Pt 10):2616-35.
PubMed PMID: 17704526.
30. Panegyres PK, Rogers JM, McCarthy M, Campbell A, Wu JS.
Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography in the differential
diagnosis of early-onset dementia: a prospective, community-based
study. BMC Neurol. 2009;9:41. PubMed PMID: 19674446.
31. Lim SM, Katsifis A, Villemagne VL, Best R, Jones G, Saling M, et al.
The 18F-FDG PET cingulate island sign and comparison to 123I-betaCIT SPECT for diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies. J Nucl Med.
2009;50(10):1638-45. PubMed PMID: 19759102.
32. Kono AK, Ishii K, Sofue K, Miyamoto N, Sakamoto S, Mori E. Fully
automatic differential diagnosis system for dementia with Lewy bodies
and Alzheimer's disease using FDG-PET and 3D-SSP. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2007;34(9):1490-7. PubMed PMID: 17318545.
33. Tarawneh R, Holtzman DM. Biomarkers in translational research of
Alzheimer's
disease.
Neuropharmacology.
2010;59(4-5):310-22.
PubMed PMID: 20394760.
34. Finder VH. Alzheimer's disease: a general introduction and
pathomechanism. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22 Suppl 3:5-19. PubMed
PMID: 20858960.
35. Villemagne VL, Pike KE, Chetelat G, Ellis KA, Mulligan RS, Bourgeat
P, et al. Longitudinal assessment of Abeta and cognition in aging and
Alzheimer disease. Ann Neurol. 2011;69(1):181-92. PubMed PMID:
21280088.

31

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH
36. Rowe CC, Ellis KA, Rimajova M, Bourgeat P, Pike KE, Jones G, et
al. Amyloid imaging results from the Australian Imaging, Biomarkers and
Lifestyle (AIBL) study of aging. Neurobiol Aging. 2010;31(8):1275-83.
PubMed PMID: 20472326.
37. Wong DF, Rosenberg PB, Zhou Y, Kumar A, Raymont V, Ravert HT,
et al. In vivo imaging of amyloid deposition in Alzheimer disease using
the radioligand 18F-AV-45 (florbetapir). J Nucl Med. 2010;51(6):913-20.
PubMed PMID: 20501908.
38. Vandenberghe R, Van Laere K, Ivanoiu A, Salmon E, Bastin C, Triau
E, et al. 18F-flutemetamol amyloid imaging in Alzheimer disease and
mild cognitive impairment: a phase 2 trial. Ann Neurol. 2010;68(3):31929. PubMed PMID: 20687209.
39. Barthel H, Gertz HJ, Dresel S, Peters O, Bartenstein P, Buerger K,
et al. Cerebral amyloid-beta PET with florbetaben ((18)F) in patients with
Alzheimer's disease and healthy controls: a multicentre phase 2
diagnostic study. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10(5):424-35. PubMed PMID:
21481640.
40. Small GW, Kepe V, Ercoli LM, Siddarth P, Bookheimer SY, Miller KJ,
et al. PET of brain amyloid and tau in mild cognitive impairment. N Engl
J Med. 2006;355(25):2652-63. PubMed PMID: 17182990.
41. Choi SR, Golding G, Zhuang Z, Zhang W, Lim N, Hefti F, et al.
Preclinical properties of 18F-AV-45: a PET agent for Abeta plaques in
the brain. J Nucl Med. 2009;50(11):1887-94. Epub 2009/10/20. doi:
10.2967/jnumed.109.065284. PubMed PMID: 19837759; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC3065020.
42. Wolk DA, Grachev ID, Buckley C, Kazi H, Grady MS, Trojanowski
JQ, et al. Association between in vivo fluorine 18-labeled flutemetamol
amyloid positron emission tomography imaging and in vivo cerebral
cortical histopathology. Arch Neurol. 2011;68(11):1398-403. Epub
2011/07/13. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.153. PubMed PMID:
21747004.
43. Villemagne VL, Mulligan RS, Pejoska S, Ong K, Jones G, O'Keefe
G, et al. Comparison of (11)C-PiB and (18)F-florbetaben for Abeta
imaging in ageing and Alzheimer's disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging. 2012. Epub 2012/03/09. doi: 10.1007/s00259-012-2088-x.
PubMed PMID: 22398958.
44. Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Devous MD, Sr., Rieck JR, Hebrank
AC, Diaz-Arrastia R, et al. beta-Amyloid burden in healthy aging:
regional distribution and cognitive consequences. Neurology.
2012;78(6):387-95.
Epub
2012/02/04.
doi:
10.1212/WNL.0b013e318245d295. PubMed PMID: 22302550; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC3280058.
45. Pontecorvo MJ, Mintun MA. PET amyloid imaging as a tool for early
diagnosis and identifying patients at risk for progression to Alzheimer's
disease. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2011;3(2):11. PubMed PMID: 21457498.
46. Sojkova J, Driscoll I, Iacono D, Zhou Y, Codispoti KE, Kraut MA, et
al. In vivo fibrillar beta-amyloid detected using [11C]PiB positron
emission tomography and neuropathologic assessment in older adults.
Arch Neurol. 2011;68(2):232-40. PubMed PMID: 21320990.
47. Clark CM, Schneider JA, Bedell BJ, Beach TG, Bilker WB, Mintun
MA, et al. Use of florbetapir-PET for imaging beta-amyloid pathology.
Jama. 2011;305(3):275-83. PubMed PMID: 21245183.
48. Administration FaD. Amyvid (Florbetapir F 18 Injection) for
intravenous
use
2012.
Available
from:
(http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2012/202008s00
0lbl.pdf).
49. Catafau AM. Brain SPECT in clinical practice. Part I: perfusion. J
Nucl Med. 2001;42(2):259-71. PubMed PMID: 11216525.
50. Masdeu JC, Zubieta JL, Arbizu J. Neuroimaging as a marker of the
onset and progression of Alzheimer's disease. J Neurol Sci. 2005;236(12):55-64. PubMed PMID: 15961110.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

51. Silverman DH. Brain 18F-FDG PET in the diagnosis of
neurodegenerative dementias: comparison with perfusion SPECT and
with clinical evaluations lacking nuclear imaging. J Nucl Med.
2004;45(4):594-607. PubMed PMID: 15073255.
52. McNeill R, Sare GM, Manoharan M, Testa HJ, Mann DM, Neary D,
et al. Accuracy of single-photon emission computed tomography in
differentiating frontotemporal dementia from Alzheimer's disease. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78(4):350-5. PubMed PMID:
17158559.
53. Engler H, Santillo AF, Wang SX, Lindau M, Savitcheva I, Nordberg
A, et al. In vivo amyloid imaging with PET in frontotemporal dementia.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2008;35(1):100-6. PubMed PMID:
17846768.
54. Rabinovici GD, Furst AJ, O'Neil JP, Racine CA, Mormino EC, Baker
SL, et al. 11C-PIB PET imaging in Alzheimer disease and
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurology. 2007;68(15):1205-12.
PubMed PMID: 17420404.
55. Villemagne VL, Ong K, Mulligan RS, Holl G, Pejoska S, Jones G, et
al. Amyloid Imaging with 18F-Florbetaben in Alzheimer Disease and
Other Dementias. J Nucl Med. 2011. PubMed PMID: 21764791.
56. Minoshima S, Foster NL, Sima AA, Frey KA, Albin RL, Kuhl DE.
Alzheimer's disease versus dementia with Lewy bodies: cerebral
metabolic distinction with autopsy confirmation. Ann Neurol.
2001;50(3):358-65. PubMed PMID: 11558792.
57. Albin RL, Minoshima S, D'Amato CJ, Frey KA, Kuhl DA, Sima AA.
Fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography in diffuse Lewy
body disease. Neurology. 1996;47(2):462-6. PubMed PMID: 8757021.
58. Aarsland D, Kurz M, Beyer M, Bronnick K, Piepenstock Nore S,
Ballard C. Early discriminatory diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.
The emerging role of CSF and imaging biomarkers. Dement Geriatr
Cogn Disord. 2008;25(3):195-205. PubMed PMID: 18204253.
59. Shimizu S, Hanyu H, Kanetaka H, Iwamoto T, Koizumi K, Abe K.
Differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer's disease
using brain SPECT. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2005;20(1):25-30.
PubMed PMID: 15832032.
60. Lobotesis K, Fenwick JD, Phipps A, Ryman A, Swann A, Ballard C,
et al. Occipital hypoperfusion on SPECT in dementia with Lewy bodies
but not AD. Neurology. 2001;56(5):643-9. PubMed PMID: 11245717.
61. Hoyte RM, Lin SS, Christman DR, Atkins HL, Hauser W, Wolf AP.
Organic radiopharmaceuticals labeled with short-lived nuclides. 3. 18Flabeled phenylalanines. J Nucl Med. 1971;12(6):280-6. PubMed PMID:
5580848.
62. McKeith I, O'Brien J, Walker Z, Tatsch K, Booij J, Darcourt J, et al.
Sensitivity and specificity of dopamine transporter imaging with 123I-FPCIT SPECT in dementia with Lewy bodies: a phase III, multicentre
study. Lancet Neurol. 2007;6(4):305-13. PubMed PMID: 17362834.
63. O'Brien JT, McKeith IG, Walker Z, Tatsch K, Booij J, Darcourt J, et
al. Diagnostic accuracy of 123I-FP-CIT SPECT in possible dementia
with Lewy bodies. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;194(1):34-9. PubMed PMID:
19118323.
64. Walker Z, Jaros E, Walker RW, Lee L, Costa DC, Livingston G, et al.
Dementia with Lewy bodies: a comparison of clinical diagnosis, FP-CIT
single photon emission computed tomography imaging and autopsy. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78(11):1176-81. PubMed PMID:
17353255.
65. Foster ER, Campbell MC, Burack MA, Hartlein J, Flores HP, Cairns
NJ, et al. Amyloid imaging of Lewy body-associated disorders. Mov
Disord. 2010;25(15):2516-23. PubMed PMID: 20922808.
66. Gomperts SN, Rentz DM, Moran E, Becker JA, Locascio JJ, Klunk
WE, et al. Imaging amyloid deposition in Lewy body diseases.
Neurology. 2008;71(12):903-10. PubMed PMID: 18794492.

32

COUNCIL ON RESEARCH

Figure Legend: Biomarkers can be categorized into four groups on the basis of their contribution to business, regulatory and clinical decision-making.
Clinical decision-making can be further divided into clinical research and patient care diagnostic subcategories. The objective is to use biomarkers as
early as possible in the drug development process. The initial step is to confirm that a test compound hits the target and to quantify the extent to which it
does so. Next is to test three concepts in logical sequence. First, that hitting this target alters the pathophysiological mechanism. Second, that altering
this mechanism affects the pathophysiology. Third, that affecting pathophysiology predictably improves the clinical status of the patients. Biomarkers
qualified to confirm the presence of the target and or extent to which the drug candidate hits the target may be validated later as diagnostic tests for
early detection or diagnosis (when that target is expressed differentially between healthy and diseased states). Biomarkers qualified for confirming and
quantifying mechanistic effects may be validated later as diagnostic tests to inform choice of therapeutic regimen, either in choice of drug or initial
dosing regimen. Biomarkers qualified for longitudinal quantification of patient response in terms of clinically relevant pathophysiology, may be validated
later as diagnostic tests for monitoring and individualization of a therapeutic regimen. Biomarkers qualified for either monitoring or individualization of
therapy on clinically relevant pathophysiology may also serve as surrogate end points to support regulatory decision-making. In addition, they can be
used to ensure appropriateness of use, and as quantifiers of clinical outcomes to support reimbursement decisions. From Hampel H, Frank R, Broich K,
Teipel SJ, Katz RG, Hardy J, Herholz K, Bokde AL, Jessen F, Hoessler YC, Sanhai WR, Zetterberg H, Woodcock J, Blennow K. Biomarkers for
Alzheimer's disease: academic, industry and regulatory perspectives. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010 Jul;9(7):560-74.
© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

33

APA Official Actions

Resource Document on Brain Imaging and Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry with Special Emphasis on Single
Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Approved by the Joint Reference Committee, January 2005
“The findings, opinions, and conclusions of this report do not
necessarily represent the views of the officers, trustees, or all
members of the American Psychiatric Association. Views
expressed are those of the authors of the individual chapters." - APA Operations Manual.

The document was prepared by the Council on Children,
Adolescents and Their Families.

Summary

Although

knowledge is increasing regarding specific

pathways and specific brain areas involved in mental
disease states, at present the use of brain imaging to study
psychiatric disorders is still considered a research tool.
Continued study of child and adolescent psychiatric
disorders using a variety of brain imaging methods, as well
as refinements in imaging techniques, may result in
evidence supporting the utility of these tools for clinical
work in the future. Imaging research cannot yet be used to
diagnose psychiatric illness and may not be useful in
clinical practice for a number of years. In the future,
imaging techniques may be useful to examine medication
effects and predict medication response.
Specifically, no published investigation in the field has
determined that any structural or functional brain
abnormality is specific to a single psychiatric disorder.
Additionally, imaging studies examine groups of patients
and groups of healthy controls; therefore, findings may not
apply to all individuals with a given disorder. Even when
significant differences are identified between groups, there
is a substantial overlap among individuals in both groups.
Particular caveats are indicated with regard to brain
imaging involving radioactive nucleotides for children and
adolescents because of children’s known greater sensitivity
to radiation and risk of radiation induced-cancer. The long
term risks of initial and repeated exposure to intravenous
radionucleotides are unknown.
We conclude that, at the present time, the available
evidence does not support the use brain imaging for
clinical diagnosis or treatment of psychiatric disorders in
children and adolescents.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Overview
Brain imaging
Single photon emission computerized tomography
(SPECT) is one type of functional neuroimaging, a category
that also includes positron emission tomography (PET),
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Functional neuroimaging yields metabolic or biochemical information,
allowing localization of a neural function. As such it is
distinct from anatomic imaging, such as radiography (XRay) or computerized tomography (CT), which illuminate
structures in a static way. Functional neuroimaging of the
brain is based on the experimental data that neuronal
activation leads to increased metabolism. Using radionucleotides to ligands possessing high and selective affinity
for neurotransmitter receptors or transporters allows for
imaging of specific neuroreceptors (Shin, 2000).
Brain-imaging tools, such as (PET), (SPECT), MRS and
(fMRI), can relate brain function to clinical features and
medication responses (Brody et al., 2001; Ketter & Wang,
2002). MRS allows for identification of neurochemical
abnormalities in specific brain regions and can identify
neurochemical changes prior to and following medication
administration. MRS is non-invasive and does not necessitate exposure to radioactive nucleotides. SPECT makes
use of radioactive tracers tagged to a molecule, which can
indicate glucose metabolism, oxygen consumption, or
blood flow. Chemical imaging with a SPECT scan works
with precursors such as tryptophan, dihydroxyphenalamine (Dopa) or enzymatic reactions that support neurotransmitters synthesis (Santosh, 2000).
History
SPECT was originally introduced in the 1980s (Goetz,
2003). Its usefulness was limited in the early years by poor
image resolution. However, refinements in computer
technology as well as in radionucleotides have resulted in
much better image quality, although not as good as with
PET. The equipment needed for SPECT is much less costly
than that needed for PET scanners (which require a
cyclotron) or MRI other forms of imaging. While PET, CT
and MRI are limited to hospitals because of their cost,
SPECT equipment is within range of outpatient office
equipment. There are no regulations that prohibit

1

individual physicians from installing and using SPECT
equipment in their offices, provided they have satisfied
regulatory requirements. Because of its low cost, SPECT is
being used in outpatient private practice, and some have
advocated for its use in clinical diagnosis of psychiatric
disorders (Amen, 2001).
Established Uses of Brain Imaging in Clinical Practice
Brain imaging does have important clinical uses.
Structural and functional images of the brain play an
important adjunct role in the diagnosis and treatment of
many neurologic conditions. The usefulness of SPECT to
study perfusion abnormalities in the brain as well as
elsewhere (e.g., the myocardium, carotid arteries) is well
established. SPECT has a role in the diagnosis of cerebral
trauma, certain kinds of dementia, strokes, seizure
disorders, and brain tumors, in which characteristic
patterns of perfusion abnormalities are detectible (Engel,
Jr., 2000; Goetz, 2003; Kuzniecky & Knowlton, 2002; Lee,
Mintun, Buckner, & Morris, 2003; Slosman & Lazeyras,
1996). In addition, Brain SPECT with neuroreceptor
imaging radiopharmaceuticals is used in cerebrovascular
diseases, dementias, epilepsy, head injury, malignant brain
tumors, movement disorders, and Gilles de la Tourette's
syndrome (Camargo, 2001). This imaging modality has
been used in diagnosis, prognosis assessment, evaluation
of response to therapy, risk stratification, detection of
benign or malignant viable tissue, and choice of medical or
surgical therapy.
However, even in the diagnosis of neurological disorders,
the use of brain imaging is not without controversy. Recent
reviews have attempted to establish guidelines to avoid
over use for such common conditions as headache (Lewis,
2002; Medina, Kuntz, & Pomeroy, 2001), and a costeffectiveness study concluded that the addition of SPECT
and fMRI did not offer advantages over the usual
diagnostic work-up of Alzheimer’s disease (McMahon,
Araki, Neumann, Harris, & Gazelle, 2000). The primary
clinical use of SPECT in psychiatry has been to rule out the
neurological conditions listed above.

Brain Imaging in Research
Brain-imaging has been used extensively in research on
psychiatric disorders, most notably, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, schizophrenia, depression, panic disorder, and
drug abuse. The findings, although not entirely robust,
have generated many hypotheses about the pathophysiology of these disorders. The following is a brief
summary of the research studies of psychiatric disorders in
which brain imaging tools, including SPECT, have proven
fruitful.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorders
Findings in Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorders are
still provisional, but suggest minor structural changes in
frontal and caudate areas, especially on the right side.
Functional studies suggest reduced activation in these and
other areas. A 2000 review of studies in children and adults
concluded, “The techniques do not yet contribute to
individual diagnosis” (Overmeyer & Taylor, 2000).
Autism
Autism has been studied in adults as well as children
using MRI, fMRI, and SPECT. MRI studies have indicated a
variety of diffuse anatomical differences, reflective of an
early developmental change in the growth or pruning of
neural tissue, rather than localized lesions; similarly,
neurochemical studies suggest early, neuromodulatory
discrepancies rather than gross or localized abnormalities.
To date we do not have definitive answers to questions of
how the brain functions differently in this disorder (Eigsti &
Shapiro, 2003; Rumsey & Ernst, 2000).
Bipolar Disorder and Depression
Although over the past two decades, brain-imaging
studies have examined the mechanisms possibly involved
in the pathophysiology of bipolar and unipolar mood
disorders, nearly all of these studies involve adults. Most
studies have used PET scans (and none of the PET studies
involve children). The available findings suggest subtle
anatomical changes in sub-regions of the prefrontal cortex,
medial temporal lobe and cerebellum, and functional
abnormalities in brain circuits inter-connecting these same
brain regions and the striatum in patients suffering from
bipolar disorder. Neuroimaging studies have reported
cerebral atrophy, ventricular enlargement, or cerebellar
atrophy (Benabarre et al., 2002).
In terms of function, findings with PET have included
decreased prefrontal cortical function concomitant with
increased subcortical anterior paralimbic activity, (Drevets
et al., 1997; Videbech, 2000). These findings are convergent,
and support the hypothesis that depressive symptoms are
caused by dysfunction of regions of the limbic system and
the frontal lobes in close connection with the basal ganglia.
A few studies point to the possibility that response to
antidepressant treatment can be predicted from PET scans
(Soares, 2003).
There are 2 published studies of SPECT and depression
in adolescents (Tutus et al., 1998; Kowatch et al., 1999). The
first, done in Turkey, involved 14 patients and 11 controls,
found relatively reduced perfusion in the left anterofrontal
and left temporal cortical areas in the depressed patients.
When the patients were restudied after their depression

2

remitted, they did not differ significantly from the controls.
The second study involved a comparison of 7 adolescent
patients with MDD and 7 controls, and found relative rCBF
increases in the depressed group as compared to normals
in the right mesial temporal cortex, the right superioranterior temporal lobe, and the left infero-lateral temporal
lobe. The researchers found rCBF decreases in the
depressed group as compared to normals in the left
parietal lobe, the anterior thalamus and the right caudate.
4. They concluded that adolescents with MDD show rCBF
abnormalities similar to those found in adult MDD rCBF
studies, but cautioned, “Further controlled studies with
larger numbers of MDD subjects and normal age- and
gender-matched controls are necessary before any definetive conclusions can be made from these findings” (p. 643).
In a comprehensive review, Soares pointed out, “Even
though preliminary findings from cross-sectional studies
indicate anatomical, neurochemical, and functional brain
abnormalities in bipolar patients in key regions involved in
mood regulation, the relationship of such abnormalities
with illness phase and their clinical relevance needs further
investigation. The potential for utilization of brain-imaging
tools to elucidate the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder
is still largely unrealized, and it is anticipated that important new developments in this area will come about over
the next years and beyond“ (Soares, 2003). Another
reviewer concluded, “Although it is not yet a clinical tool
for bipolar disorders, (italics added) brain imaging
provides useful research data to understand the fundamental neurobiology of mood disorders and to more
effectively target therapeutics” (Ketter et al., 2002).
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Obsessive compulsive disorder has been studied
extensively with imaging and has shown the most
consistent findings so far, with the orbitofrontal cortex and
the caudate nucleus being implicated in PET studies
(Santosh, 2000). PET indices of brain activity within the
orbitofrontal cortex are inversely correlated with
subsequent response to SRIs. (Rauch et al., 2002). Most
studies have involved adults. There are reports of SPECT
studies of this condition in the literature, some of which
included adolescents, but these are mostly older studies.
There is one case report of SPECT and an adolescent with
OCD who showed changes after being treated with
chlomipramine (Amen & Waugh, 1997).
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
PET, SPECT and functional MRI have been used to study
how individuals with PTSD respond when they are
presented with trauma-related stimuli. A pattern of
hyperresponsivity of the amygdala and anterior paralimbic

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

structures (which are known to be involved in processing
negative emotions such as fear), greater deactivation of
Broca's region (motor speech) and other nonlimbic cortical
regions, and failure of activation of the cingulate cortex
(which possibly plays an inhibitory role) has been found
(Pitman, Shin, & Rauch, 2001). There are no studies of
children and adolescents with PTSD using SPECT.
Schizophrenia
The current understanding of schizophrenia as a
neurodevelopment disorder is largely due to brain imaging
studies (Batista et al., 1995; Eliez & Reiss, 2000; Hendren,
De Backer, & Pandina, 2000).
SPECT has helped to elucidate the neurobiology of
schizophrenia via the study of cerebral blood flow and
neuroreceptors in this condition. There is converging
evidence implicating three brain systems: frontal,
temporolimbic, and basal ganglia. (Gur & Pearlson, 1993).
PET and SPECT have revealed disturbances of cerebral
blood flow and glucose metabolism in patients with
schizophrenia. These tools have also proved useful in
studying the relative receptor occupancy of typical and
atypical antipsychotic medications. (McClure, Keshavan, &
Pettegrew, 1998). There are several studies of first break
schizophrenics using SPECT and these usually include
older adolescents, but no such studies of children.

Provisional Nature of Findings
Despite the excitement neuroimaging has brought to the
field of psychiatry, it remains an investigational tool. The
hope is that the continued growth of knowledge will
eventually have practical applications in guiding psychological and pharmacologic treatments, but the general
consensus is that SPECT and other kinds of neuroimaging
are not yet recommended for diagnostic evaluation and
treatment monitoring in individual patients.
Additional concerns are relevant to the use of
neuroimaging in children and adolescents with psychiatric
disorders. To date, the overwhelming preponderance of
studies have been in adults. PET and SPECT involve
exposure to radioactive agents, and MRI and fMRI involve
sedation. The long term effects of exposure of the
immature brain to radiation are unknown. Concerns about
the investigational uses of brain imaging for children
revolve around the unclear risk-benefit ratio of such
studies, as well as the difficulties involved in informed
consent or assent with regard to a complex technology
(Hinton, 2002). In a 10 year review published in the Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry in 2000, Hendren and colleagues concluded,
citing inconsistencies in data, “Although neuroimaging
technology holds great promise for neurodevelopmental

3

research, it is not yet a diagnostic instrument.”(Hendren et
al., 2000). This opinion was echoed by Santosh, another
review author, who states, “As yet, no specific and
consistent abnormality has been detected in childhood
psychiatric disorders.” (Santosh, 2000). Even with the
continued advances in the understanding of brain
structure and function in psychiatric disorders since these
reviews, brain imaging has still not progressed to the point
of being useful for the clinical diagnosis of these disorders
in individual patients. As of this writing, no studies have
been published in journals indexed by the National Library
of Medicine examining the predictive ability of
neuroimaging for psychiatric disorders for either adults or
children.
Some of the problems still to be resolved are the
following:

Findings have been inconsistent. Most studies have
involved small numbers of patients, and children and
adolescents have been even less well studied than
adults. The studies have great discrepancies related to
sample size, subject selection, imaging protocol and
image analysis. Methodological differences among
studies may further confound the results.

There are few normative data sets on children (Hinton,
2002). Without normative data, interpretation of
findings on individual patients is meaningless. In part
this lack is due to ethical constraints on using brain
imaging to study normal children.

Some disorders may involve subtle changes in
structure and/or function that are not apparent on
brain imaging studies.

The changes observed may not accurately reflect
underlying neurobiological dysfunction in the brain
structures being studied, but could be compensatory
mechanisms reflecting adaptation to deficits in other
aspects of brain function.

Ethical dilemmas exist with regard to exposure of
children to radiation when it is not useful to guide
treatment.

There are potential iatrogenic problems in labeling a
child as psychiatrically disordered, or as free of
psychiatric disorder, on the basis of data derived from
neuroimaging studies, given the lack of data regarding
the sensitivity and specificity of such information.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.

16.

17.
18.
19.
20.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

Amen, D.G. (2001). Why don't psychiatrists look at the brain? The
case for greater use of SPECT imaging in neuropsychiatry.
Neuropsychiatry Reviews, 1(2), 1-6.
Amen, D.G., & Waugh,M.E. (1997). Three years on clomipramine:
before and after brain SPECT study. Ann.Clin Psychiatry, 9(2),
113-116.
Batista, J.F., Galiano,M.C., Torres,L.A., Hernandez,M.C., Sosa,F.,
Perera,A., & Perez,M. (1995). Brain single-photon emission
tomography with technetium-99m hexamethylpropylene amine
oxime in adolescents with initial-stage schizophrenia. Eur.J
Nucl.Med., 22(11), 1274-1277.
Benabarre, A., Vieta,E., Martinez-Aran,A., Reinares,M., Colom,F.,
Lomena,F., Martin,F., & Valdes,M. (2002). The somatics of psyche:
structural
neuromorphometry
of
bipolar
disorder.
Psychother.Psychosom., 71(4), 180-189.
Brody, A.L., Saxena,S., Stoessel,P., Gillies,L.A., Fairbanks,L.A.,
Alborzian,S., Phelps,M.E., Huang,S.C., Wu,H.M., Ho,M.L.,
Ho,M.K., Au,S.C., Maidment,K., & Baxter,L.R., Jr. (2001). Regional
brain metabolic changes in patients with major depression
treated with either paroxetine or interpersonal therapy:
preliminary findings. Arch.Gen.Psychiatry, 58(7), 631-640.
Camargo, E.E. (2001). Brain SPECT in neurology and psychiatry. J
Nucl.Med., 42(4), 611-623.
Drevets, W.C., Price, J.L., Simpson,J.R., Jr., Todd,R.D., Reich,T.,
Vannier,M., & Raichle,M.E. (1997). Subgenual prefrontal cortex
abnormalities in mood disorders. Nature, 386(6627), 824-827.
Eigsti, I.M., & Shapiro, T. (2003). A systems neuroscience
approach to autism: biological, cognitive, and clinical
perspectives. Ment.Retard.Dev.Disabil.Res.Rev., 9(3), 205-215.
Eliez, S., & Reiss, A.L. (2000). MRI neuroimaging of childhood
psychiatric disorders: a selective review. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry, 41(6), 679-694.
Engel, J., Jr. (2000). Overview of functional neuroimaging in
epilepsy. Adv Neurol., 83, 1-9.
Goetz, C.G. (2003). Textbook of Clinical Neurology, 2nd Edition.
(2nd ed.). Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
Gur, R.E., & Pearlson, G.D. (1993). Neuroimaging in
schizophrenia research. Schizophr.Bull., 19(2), 337-353.
Hendren, R.L., De Backer, I., & Pandina, G.J. (2000). Review of
neuroimaging studies of child and adolescent psychiatric
disorders from the past 10 years. J Am Acad.Child
Adolesc.Psychiatry, 39(7), 815-828.
Hinton, V.J. (2002). Ethics of neuroimaging in pediatric
development. Brain Cogn, 50(3), 455-468.
Ketter, T.A., & Wang, P.W. (2002). Predictors of treatment
response in bipolar disorders: evidence from clinical and brain
imaging studies. J Clin Psychiatry, 63 Suppl 3, 21-25.
Kowatch R.A., Devous M.D. Sr, Harvey D.C., Mayes TL, Trivedi,
M.H., Emslie, G.J., Weinberg, W.A. (1999)..A SPECT HMPAO study
of regional cerebral blood flow in depressed adolescents and
normal controls. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry.
23:643-656.
Kuzniecky, R.I., & Knowlton, R.C. (2002). Neuroimaging of
epilepsy. Semin.Neurol., 22(3), 279-288.
Lee, B.C., Mintun, M., Buckner, R.L., & Morris, J.C. (2003).
Imaging of Alzheimer's disease. J Neuroimaging, 13(3), 199-214.
Lewis, D.W. (2002). Headaches in children and adolescents. Am
Fam.Physician, 65(4), 625-632.
McClure, R.J., Keshavan, M.S., & Pettegrew, J.W. (1998). Chemical
and physiologic brain imaging in schizophrenia. Psychiatr Clin
North Am, 21(1), 93-122.

4

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

McMahon, P.M., Araki, S.S., Neumann, P.J., Harris,G.J., & Gazelle,
G.S. (2000). Cost-effectiveness of functional imaging tests in the
diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. Radiology, 217(1), 58-68.
Medina, L.S., Kuntz, K.M., & Pomeroy, S. (2001). Children with
headache suspected of having a brain tumor: a cost-effectiveness
analysis of diagnostic strategies. Pediatrics, 108(2), 255-263.
Overmeyer, S., & Taylor, E. (2000). Neuroimaging in hyperkinetic
children and adults: an overview. Pediatr.Rehabil., 4(2), 57-70.
Pitman, R.K., Shin, L.M., & Rauch, S.L. (2001). Investigating the
pathogenesis of posttraumatic stress disorder with neuroimaging.
[Review] [44 refs]. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry., 62, Suppl-54
Rauch, S.L., Shin, L.M., Dougherty, D.D., Alpert, N.M., Fischman,
A.J., & Jenike, M.A. (2002). Predictors of fluvoxamine response in
contamination-related obsessive compulsive disorder: a PET
symptom provocation study. Neuropsychopharmacology, 27(5),
782-791.
Rumsey, J.M., & Ernst, M. (2000). Functional neuroimaging of
autistic disorders. Ment.Retard.Dev.Disabil.Res.Rev., 6(3), 171179.

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

Santosh, P.J. (2000). Neuroimaging in child and adolescent
psychiatric disorders. Arch.Dis.Child, 82(5), 412-419.
Shin, C. (2000). Neurophysiologic basis of functional
neuroimaging: animal studies. J Clin Neurophysiol, 17(1), 2-9.
Slosman, D.O., & Lazeyras, F. (1996). Metabolic imaging in the
diagnosis of brain tumors. Curr.Opin.Neurol., 9(6), 429-435.
Soares, J.C. (2003). Contributions from brain imaging to the
elucidation of pathophysiology of bipolar disorder. Int.J
Neuropsychopharmacol., 6(2), 171-180.
Tutus, A., Kibar, M., Sofuoglu, S., Basturk, M., & Gonul, A.S.
(1998). A technetium-99m hexamethylpropylene amine oxime
brain single-photon emission tomography study in adolescent
patients with major depressive disorder. Eur.J Nucl.Med., 25(6),
601-606.
Videbech, P. (2000). PET measurements of brain glucose
metabolism and blood flow in major depressive disorder: a
critical review. Acta Psychiatr Scand., 101(1), 11-20.

5

BUCHANAN, BINDER, NORKO, SWARTZ

© Copyright, American Psychiatric Association, all rights reserved.

6

