Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/dcn

Topological organization of the human brain functional
connectome across the lifespan
Miao Cao a,j , Jin-Hui Wang a,c,d , Zheng-Jia Dai a,j , Xiao-Yan Cao b,c,d , Li-Li Jiang b ,
Feng-Mei Fan b,e , Xiao-Wei Song f , Ming-Rui Xia a,j , Ni Shu a,j , Qi Dong a,j ,
Michael P. Milham g,h , F. Xavier Castellanos h,i , Xi-Nian Zuo b,j,∗ , Yong He a,j,∗∗
a
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & International Data Group/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
b
Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Magnetic Resonance Imaging Research Center, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
c
Center for Cognition and Brain Disorders, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310015, China
d
Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Research in Assessment of Cognitive Impairments, Hangzhou 310015, China
e
Psychiatry Research Center, Beijing Huilongguan Hospital, Beijing 100096, China
f
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
g
Center for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, NY 10022, USA
h
Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA
i
Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY
10016, USA
j
Center for Collaboration and Innovation in Brain and Learning Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 4 July 2013
Received in revised form
18 November 2013
Accepted 19 November 2013

Keywords:
Functional connectomics
Lifespan trajectory
Rich club
Graph theory

a b s t r a c t
Human brain function undergoes complex transformations across the lifespan. We
employed resting-state functional MRI and graph-theory approaches to systematically
chart the lifespan trajectory of the topological organization of human whole-brain functional networks in 126 healthy individuals ranging in age from 7 to 85 years. Brain
networks were constructed by computing Pearson’s correlations in blood-oxygenationlevel-dependent temporal ﬂuctuations among 1024 parcellation units followed by
graph-based network analyses. We observed that the human brain functional connectome
exhibited highly preserved non-random modular and rich club organization over the entire
age range studied. Further quantitative analyses revealed linear decreases in modularity
and inverted-U shaped trajectories of local efﬁciency and rich club architecture. Regionally
heterogeneous age effects were mainly located in several hubs (e.g., default network, dorsal
attention regions). Finally, we observed inverse trajectories of long- and short-distance

∗ Corresponding author at: Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 16 Lincui Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100101, China. Tel.: +86 10 6485 3798; fax: +86 10 6485 3798.
∗∗ Corresponding author at: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & International Data Group/McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Beijing Normal University, No. 19 Xinjiekouwai Street, Haidian District, Beijing 100875, China. Tel.: +86 10 5880 2036; fax: +86 10 5880 2036.
E-mail addresses: zuoxn@psych.ac.cn, zuoxinian@gmail.com (X.-N. Zuo), yong.he@bnu.edu.cn (Y. He).
1878-9293 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2013.11.004

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

77

functional connections, indicating that the reorganization of connectivity concentrates and
distributes the brain’s functional networks. Our results demonstrate topological changes in
the whole-brain functional connectome across nearly the entire human lifespan, providing
insights into the neural substrates underlying individual variations in behavior and cognition. These results have important implications for disease connectomics because they
provide a baseline for evaluating network impairments in age-related neuropsychiatric
disorders.
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

1. Introduction
The structure and function of the human brain undergo
complex changes across the lifespan, which are becoming accessible through a range of neuroimaging methods.
For instance, age-related structural changes have been
documented in gray matter (GM) volume (Sowell et al.,
2003; Ziegler et al., 2012), cortical thickness (Salat et al.,
2004; Shaw et al., 2008) and white matter (WM) structural
properties (Asato et al., 2010; Lebel et al., 2012; Westlye
et al., 2010). Age-related functional changes have also been
detected via electrical signals (Clarke et al., 2001; Polich,
1997), glucose metabolism (Alavi et al., 1993; Chugani
et al., 1987; Tanna et al., 1991) and blood oxygen leveldependent (BOLD) signals (Damoiseaux et al., 2008; Grady
et al., 2006; Kelly et al., 2009). These changes are thought to
reﬂect synaptic pruning and myelination or cell shrinkage
at the neuronal level (Giedd and Rapoport, 2010; Salat et al.,
2005; Sowell et al., 2003) and to partly account for the maturation or decline in human cognitive function. However,
these studies have focused mainly on focal brain attributes
rather than integrated communication across regions.
The human brain is structurally and functionally organized into a complex network that is known as the human
brain connectome (Biswal et al., 2010; Kelly et al., 2012;
Sporns et al., 2005; Zuo et al., 2012) to facilitate the
effective segregation and integration of information processing. Recent studies employing graph theory to describe
the organization of both structural and functional brain
connectomics have consistently demonstrated many nontrivial topological properties such as efﬁcient network
architecture, modular structure, central communication
hubs, and rich club architecture, which is formed by the
densely interconnected hubs [for reviews, see (Bassett and
Bullmore, 2009; Bullmore and Sporns, 2009; Stam, 2010;
van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011, 2013)]. In particular,
by examining inter-regional correlations in spontaneous
BOLD ﬂuctuations (i.e., functional connectivity) (Biswal
et al., 1995; Fox and Raichle, 2007), resting-state functional MRI (R-fMRI) can be used to non-invasively map
individual functional connectomics. R-fMRI studies have
explored age-related changes in functional connectivity
patterns in the whole-brain network (Achard and Bullmore,
2007; Fair et al., 2009; Meunier et al., 2009a; Supekar et al.,
2009; Wu et al., 2013) and in speciﬁc sub-networks involving default-mode (Fair et al., 2008; Supekar et al., 2010;
Thomason et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2011), cognitive-control
(Fair et al., 2007; Luna et al., 2010) and reading functions
(Vogel et al., 2013). However, these studies have focused
either on early (developmental) or late (aging) age-related
changes. To date, two R-fMRI studies have examined

age-related changes in interregional functional connectivity across the lifespan by combining data from two research
sites (Wang et al., 2012; Zuo et al., 2010). Zuo et al. (2010)
focused on the lifespan changes of the inter-hemispheric
connectivity between two homotopic voxels. Using the
same datasets as in Zuo et al. (2010), Wang et al. (2012)
employed functional connectivity as the basic feature of the
human brain to predict individual ages using the machinelearning algorithm. These two studies examined linear and
nonlinear models of the lifespan changes in human brain
connectivity. However, they did not explore the lifespan
trajectories of brain network properties based on graph
theory, which was the main aim of the present paper.
We used R-fMRI and graphic network analyses to chart
the lifespan trajectory of the human whole-brain functional
connectome based on a single-site public dataset with
an age range of 7–85 years. As noted, the human brain’s
structure and function undergo substantial changes during
normal development and aging. In this study, we sought
to determine whether and how the topological organization of functional brain networks (including global network
structures and pivotal regions/connections) changes with
age across a wide age range encompassing most of the lifespan.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Participants and data acquisition
The present study included a total of 126 healthy,
right-handed individuals (age range, 7–85 years; mean
age, 36.8 ± 21.2 years; 68 males and 58 females; Supplemental Figure 1) from the NKI/Rockland Sample (NKI-RS),
which is provided by the Nathan Kline Institute (NKI,
NY, USA) and publicly available at the International Neuroimaging Data-sharing Initiative (INDI) online database
(http://fcon 1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/pro/nki.html)
(Nooner et al., 2012). The NKI institutional review board
approved all approvals and procedures for collection
and sharing of data and written informed consent was
obtained from each participant. For those children who
were unable to give informed consent, written informed
consent was obtained from their legal guardian. Further
details regarding the study image acquisition protocol
are available on the INDI website. To date, there are
three papers published only based upon a subset of
NKI-RS sample (Uddin et al., 2011; Oler et al., 2012; Laird
et al., 2013) for controls in developmental or adulthood
studies. In addition, Mwangi et al. (2013) employed
188 diffusion tensor imaging datasets of this sample to
study the brain structure across the lifespan. A recently

78

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

accepted work used the same datasets as the current
work (Yang et al., 2013) explored default network changes
across the lifespan. A detailed table of the subjects’ INDI
database identiﬁers, corresponding age and sex and a
distribution histogram of the subjects are provided in the
Supplementary materials (Figure S1, Table S1).
”All subjects were scanned using a Siemens TrioTM
3.0 Tesla MRI scanner. The R-fMRI scans were then
collected using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence
(time repetition (TR) / time echo (TE) = 2500/30 ms, ﬂip
angle (FA) = 80◦ , ﬁeld of view (FOV) = 216 × 216 mm2 ,
voxel size = 3.0 × 3.0 × 3.0 mm3 , number of slices = 38).
The scanning lasted 650s (∼10 minutes), which consisted of 260 contiguous functional volumes. The subjects
were instructed to keep their eyes closed, relax their
minds, and remain as motionless as possible during the
EPI data acquisition. The 3D T1-weighted images were
acquired using a magnetization-prepared rapid gradient
echo (MPRAGE) sequence (TR/TE = 2500/3.5 ms, inversion time = 1200 ms, FA = 8◦ , FOV = 256×256 mm2, voxel
size = 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.0 mm3 , number of slices = 192) and were
used for spatial normalization and group-speciﬁc template
generation.”
2.2. Data preprocessing
Data preprocessing was performed using the Connectome Computation System (CCS: http://lfcd.psych.ac.
cn/ccs.html) (Zuo et al., 2013). The CCS provides a common
platform for brain connectome analysis by integrating the
functionality of AFNI, FSL and Freesurfer. The preprocessing contained both functional and structural processing
steps. Brieﬂy, functional preprocessing included the following: (i) discarding of the ﬁrst four EPI volumes from
each scan for signal equilibration, (ii) slice timing correction for timing offsets, (iii) 3D geometrical displacement
correction for head motion, (iv) 4D global mean-based
intensity normalization. Furthermore, (v) given recent concerns about the inﬂuence of micro-level head motion
on functional connectivity and graphical network metrics
(Power et al., 2012; Satterthwaite et al., 2012; Van Dijk
et al., 2012), the Friston-24 model (Friston et al., 1996),
which has been proven to well remove motion artifact (Yan
et al., 2013), was employed here. Thus, we did nuisance
correction by regressing out 24 motion signals, including realigned data on 6 head motion parameters, 6 head
motion parameters one time point before, and the 12 corresponding squared items, individual global means, and WM
and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) mean signals derived from
the WM/CSF masks output by the segmentation routine
of Freesurfer. Final steps include (vi) band-pass temporal ﬁltering (0.01–0.1 Hz) and (vii) removal of linear and
quadratic trends. The structural processing steps included
the following steps: (i) removal of the MR image noise using
a spatially adaptive non-local means ﬁlter, (ii) brain surface
reconstruction via the recon-all command in Freesurfer and
(iii) spatial normalization from individual functional space
to MNI152 standard brain space (FLIRT + FNIRT in FSL). A
customized group T1 template in the MNI standard space
was generated to reduce the error term resulting from
image registration and bias in template selection. Finally,

each subject’s four-dimensional residual time-series in
native space was registered to the standard space with a
3-mm resolution.
2.3. Network construction
In this study, we constructed macro-scale functional
networks with nodes for brain regions and edges for interregional functional connectivity (Bullmore and Sporns,
2009; He and Evans, 2010). Speciﬁcally, to deﬁne the network nodes, a group mask in the MNI152 standard space
was ﬁrst generated, which includes all GM (GM tissue probability > 0.2) voxels with non-zeros standard deviations of
the BOLD time series. The mean GM probability map was
obtained from all individuals’ GM segmentations. We then
divided the group mask into a total of 1024 contiguous
and uniform regions of interests (ROIs) using a random
partitioning procedure (Zalesky et al., 2010). To deﬁne
network edges, we computed the intrinsic functional connectivity for each pair of 1024 ROIs by computing Pearson
correlation coefﬁcients between the regional mean time
series. These correlation coefﬁcients were converted to Zvalues via using Fisher’s r-to-z transform to improve the
normality, resulting in a symmetric 1024 × 1024 Z-value
connection matrix (i.e., functional connectivity matrix) for
each subject. To remove spurious correlations, we set the
matrix elements (correlations) with p-values higher than
a statistical threshold (p > 0.05, Bonferroni-corrected) to
zero. Due to the ambiguous biological explanation of negative correlations (Fox et al., 2009; Murphy et al., 2009), we
restricted our analysis to positive correlations.
2.4. Network analyses
We systematically analyzed the global, regional and
connectional properties (for illustrations, see Fig. 1) of the
resultant brain functional networks as follows.
(i) To examine the global network properties, we ﬁrst
explored the topological efﬁciency, modularity and vulnerability/robustness of the brain networks, which are
described brieﬂy below.
Network efﬁciency: Speciﬁcally, for a weighted network
G with N nodes, the topological length or distance of each
edge is assigned by computing the reciprocal of the edge
weight. The path length between any pair of nodes is
deﬁned as the sum of the edge lengths along the path and
the characteristic path length is the length of the shortest
ones. The inverse of the harmonic mean of the characteristic path length between each pair of nodes within the
network is deﬁned as the global network efﬁciency:
Eglob (G) =

1
N(N − 1)


1≤i,j≤N,i =
/ j

1
Lij

(1)

where Lij is the characteristic path length between nodes
i and j in the network. The global efﬁciency of network G
measures the global efﬁciency of the parallel information
transfer in the network (Latora and Marchiori, 2001, 2003).

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

Fig. 1. Illustrations of network measures. A weighted graph composed of
18 nodes and 32 edges is shown as an example. The line thickness represents the connectional weights. (A) depicts the characteristic path length
between nodes a and b. There are many ways between nodes a and b,
but the shortest one (i.e., the characteristic path length) is 3, indicated
by the red lines. (B) shows that the connectivity strength of node c (red
color) is calculated as the average of the weights of the edges (red lines)
linking with it. Node c is a highly connected hub, with a relatively highly
dense connectivity level. All hubs in this graph are shown as larger dots.
(C) shows the presence of a clustered module, as indicated by seven nodes
(encircled in blue) being mutually strongly interconnected, but sparsely
connected to the rest of the network. (D) indicates the rich-club organization (red dots and lines), which is formed by the densely inter-connected
hubs c, d and e. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The local network efﬁciency is deﬁned as the average of the
global efﬁciency of each node’s neighborhood sub-graph:
Eloc (G) =

1
N



Eglob (Gi )

(2)

1≤i≤N

where Gi denotes the sub-graph composed of the nearest
neighbors of node i. The local efﬁciency reveals how well
the network tolerates faults and illustrates the efﬁciency
of communication among the ﬁrst neighbors of the node i
when it is removed.
Modularity: Modularity, which refers to the existence of
multiple densely connected modules of brain regions, is a
central principle in brain network organization (Meunier
et al., 2009b). To explore the signiﬁcance of the modular
structure in the functional connectome, we calculated the
modularity index Qmax using a spectral optimization algorithm (Newman, 2006). For a given partition p of a weighted
network, Q(p) is deﬁned as:
Q (p) =

Nm 

w

i

W

−

 W 2 
i

2W

(3)

i=1

where Nm is the number of modules, W is the total weight
of the network, wi is the sum of the connectional weights
between all nodes in module i and Wi is the sum of the
all regional functional connection strengths (i.e., rFCS, see
below for details) in module i. Qmax is the largest network modularity resulting from a speciﬁc partition p. One
hundred corresponding random networks with the same

79

number of nodes, edges and degree distribution as the
real networks using Maslov’s wiring algorithm (Maslov and
Sneppen, 2002) were generated for comparison. Each edge
weight was retained during the randomization procedure
to preserve the weight distribution of the network.
Notably, besides examining the absolute network properties based on the correlation thresholding method, we
also examined the relative network properties based on
density thresholding networks considering that different
numbers of edges in networks could interfere with detecting age-related differences in topological organization (He
et al., 2009; Rubinov and Sporns, 2010). We constructed
the relative networks at 5 different connection densities
(for deﬁnition, see below) in a range of 5–20% (the density range of the absolute networks of all subjects) and
calculated the corresponding properties of each network.
The graph metrics were then averaged across the density
range for each subject to reduce the dependency of results
on arbitrary choice of a signal connection density (Rubinov
and Sporns, 2010). The absolute network metrics capture
the network properties but cannot completely detect the
alterations in the topological organization over the lifespan because there are a different number of edges in each
network. The relative network metrics based upon same
density thresholds capture the changes in network organization of each subject by imposing on each network the
same number of edges for compensatory adaptations. Thus,
the absolute and relative properties measures provide a
way to characterize fully the organizational differences in
the functional networks across individuals (He et al., 2009).
(ii) To explore nodal properties, we considered the rFCS
(i.e., the weighted degree centrality) due to its high
test–retest reliability at both the parcel and voxel levels (Wang et al., 2009; Zuo et al., 2012). Given a brain
region i, its rFCS is deﬁned as:

rFCS(i) =

1
N−1



wrij

(4)

1≤j≤N,j =
/ i

where wrij is the weight or strength of edge rij linking node i
and j, i.e., the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient. rFCS measures
the average functional connectivity strength of this region
i to all other regions in the brain network.
Regions with higher (>1 SD beyond the mean) rFCSs,
referred to as hubs, are thought to play important roles in
the communication of information in brain connectomics
(Buckner et al., 2009; Cole et al., 2010; Zuo et al., 2012). In
this study, we further explored the connectivity patterns
among these functional hubs. We considered the hubs and
their connections as a sub-network and calculated the correlation density using the weighted rich club coefﬁcient
measure ˚, which was computed as the ratio between the
sum of weights of E connections between hub regions and
the strongest E connections for the whole network, which
is given by the following:
˚=

E

Ewei

j=1

Wranked

(5)

80

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

where Ewei is the sum of weights of connections between
the hub regions, and Wranked is a vector of all connections
in the examined network ranked by weight. A signiﬁcantly greater rich club coefﬁcient in a brain network
than expected by chance (i.e., the results of random networks) indicates the existence of a rich club organization.
In other words, the hub nodes are more densely connected
among themselves than non-hub nodes and thus form a
highly interconnected club. For each brain network, the
rich club coefﬁcients of 100 corresponding random networks, ˚random , were computed. The overall ˚random was
computed as the average rich club coefﬁcient over the 100
random networks. The normalized rich club coefﬁcient,
˚norm , was computed as follows:
˚norm =

˚
˚random

(7)

which scales the number of edges existing in the network.
The network mean connectivity strength was calculated as
the average of the strength across all of the existing edges
in the network:
Str(G) =

W
2K

(10)

Y = ˇ0 + ˇ1 × age + ˇ2 × age2 + ˇ3 × sex + ˇ4 × meanFD

(iii) To explore the properties of functional network
connectivity, we employed three measures: network connection density; network mean connectivity
strength; and network mean anatomical distance.
Brieﬂy, for a network G with N nodes and K edges, the
network density was calculated as follows:
2K
N(N − 1)

Y = ˇ0 + ˇ1 × age + ˇ2 × sex + ˇ3 × meanFD + ˇ4 × tSNR

(6)

To evaluate the reproducibility of rich club analysis, we
also used four other thresholds to deﬁne the hub regions
(rFCS > 0.5, 0.75, 1.25, 1.5 SD beyond the mean).

D(G) =

covariates, mean frame-wise displacement [meanFD, for
calculation method, see Power et al. (2012)], and temporal
signal-to-noise ratio [tSNR, for calculation method, see Van
Dijk et al. (2012)], which was used to estimate data quality.
Notably, the meanFD of all subjects was <0.50 mm (range,
0.03–0.43 mm; mean, 0.14 mm; SD, 0.08), which indicates
that the subjects included in this study all had rather small
head motions. The meanFD positively correlated with age
(p < 0.0001, r2 = 0.25; Figure S2), while no signiﬁcant sex
effect was detected (p = 0.10). Speciﬁcally, the GLM models
were separately formulated as follows:

(8)

where W is the total connectional weights of the network.
For each connection in the functional network, we deﬁned
its anatomical distance approximately as the Euclidean distance between the two nodes. Further, we calculated the
network mean anatomical distance as follows:

+ ˇ5 × tSNR

(11)

Akaike’s information criterion (AIC) (Akaike, 1974;
Hurvich and Tsai, 1989) was used to determine the model
with the best ﬁt. One sample t-tests were performed on
the regression coefﬁcients of the predictor variables. For
network properties exhibiting signiﬁcant quadratic age
effects, the following equation was further used to determine the peak age:
Agepeak =

−ˇ1
2ˇ2

(12)

(ii) To explore the sex-related differences and their development, we used the following GLM model, which
included sex and age-by-sex interaction as predictors,
to detect both positive (female > male) and negative
(male > female) contrasts as well as positive and negative age-by-sex interactions:
Y = ˇ0 + ˇ1 × age + ˇ2 × sex + ˇ3 × sex × age + ˇ4
× meanFD + ˇ5 × tSNR

(13)



Dis(G) =

d
1≤i,j≤N rij
2K

(9)

where drij is the anatomical distance of edge rij . Notably, we
further grouped the connections of each subject’s network
into 17 bins with a 10-mm step according to the connections’ anatomical distances. The connection number, the
occupied proportion of the whole edges and the mean connectivity strength of each bin were then calculated.
2.5. Statistical analyses
To determine the changes in the functional connectome across the lifespan, a general linear model (GLM)
was used for each metric as follows. (i) To explore linear or quadratic age effects, we used two multiple linear
regressions that modeled the targeted property with age
or age2 as predictors along with three other covariates
that included sex (female 1, male 0), one head-motion

2.6. Regional parcellation approaches
Several studies have demonstrated that the quantiﬁcation of topological organization of brain networks is
parcellation-dependent (de Reus and van den Heuvel,
2013; Wang et al., 2009). Although the high-resolution,
randomly-generated template we used may positively
impact the consistency of several graph characteristics
(Fornito et al., 2010; van Wijk et al., 2010; Zalesky
et al., 2010), we also employed two low-resolution functional atlases, L-Yeo131 (Yeo et al., 2011) and L-Dos160
(Dosenbach et al., 2010), to determine whether age-related
differences were inﬂuenced by parcellation methods.
Speciﬁcally, the brain is parcellated into 7 cortical networks
in the L-Yeo131 atlas including 57 parcellation elements
(parcels) in the cortex and 8 subcortical parcels (i.e.,
amygdala, caudate, hippocampus, accumbens-area, pallidum, putamen, thalamus-proper and cerebellum-cortex)

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

for each hemisphere and brain stem. The L-Dos160 we used
was identical to that used by Dosenbach et al. (2010), which
was derived from a series of meta-analyses of task-related
fMRI studies.
2.7. Validation analyses
Given the controversy surrounding the idea that global
signal regression (GSR) can introduce negative correlations
and reshape the distribution of functional connectivity
across the whole brain (Fox et al., 2009; Murphy et al.,
2009), we repeated the analyses without GSR to assess
the inﬂuence of this preprocessing, although we focused
exclusively on positive correlations in the present work.
3. Results
3.1. Age-related changes
3.1.1. Global properties
The ‘absolute’ thresholding approach (Hayasaka and
Laurienti, 2010; van den Heuvel et al., 2008, 2009),
which only preserves the signiﬁcantly existing correlations, produced individual brain networks containing
different edge numbers, resulting in a connection density
range of 5–20%. Of the 126 networks, 83 were fully connected; the remaining had at least 99.0% of their nodes
fully connected. Although age and density were unrelated
(r = −0.08, p = 0.35), we employed a second ‘relative’ threshold method in which networks were constructed with
the same density threshold value to have the same edge
numbers. To characterize the age effects on the global
network topological properties, three key graphic metrics were employed, network efﬁciency (global efﬁciency
and local efﬁciency) and modularity, which were all calculated based on both ‘absolute’ and ‘relative’ networks. We
found signiﬁcant age-related differences in network local
efﬁciency and module structure. The absolute global efﬁciency of brain functional networks showed no signiﬁcant
relationship with age, while the local efﬁciency showed
an inverted U-shaped trajectory (absolute global efﬁciency: p = 0.13, r2 = 0.12; local efﬁciency: p = 0.03, r2 = 0.21;
Fig. 2A). Although all individual brain networks exhibited signiﬁcantly modular structures across the lifespan
(all Z-scores > 113.3, p < 0.0001), the absolute modularity
decreased linearly with age (p < 0.001, r2 = 0.15; Fig. 2A).
Notably, similar age-related differences were observed for
both relative global and local efﬁciency (relative global efﬁciency: p = 0.13, r2 = 0.12; local efﬁciency: p = 0.09, r2 = 0.14;
Fig. 1B). The relative modularity also decreased linearly
with age (p < 0.001, r2 = 0.22; Fig. 2B). The modularity number did not differ signiﬁcantly with age for either the
absolute or the relative functional networks.
3.1.2. Regional properties
Using a weighted degree centrality metric, rFCS, we
identiﬁed the most highly connected regions (i.e., hubs) of
the networks. The brain hubs were predominantly located
in the default-mode (e.g., medial frontal and parietal
cortices as well as the lateral temporal and parietal cortical regions), attention-related regions (e.g., insula, dorsal

81

anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), lateral frontal cortex and
temporal-parietal junction) and the visual cortex (Fig. 3A
and B). Notably, both the mean rFCS map across all subjects and the ﬁtted rFCS maps of different age populations
were highly similar to the hub probability map derived
from all subjects (r = 0.54 ± 0.12, ps < 0.001; Fig. 3C). Further analyses revealed that the brain hubs were densely
connected: the weighted rich club coefﬁcients, ˚, of the
sub-network composed of brain hubs were signiﬁcantly
larger than those of matched random networks, ˚random
(all Z-scores > 20.51 ps < 0.001). In addition, an increasing
mean ˚norm over a range of hub thresholds was observed
(Fig. 4A). This result suggests that the functional networks
of the human brain contained a rich club architecture in
which the highly connected regions were more densely
linked among themselves than the weakly connected
regions. Fig. 3C shows the rich club structure of the groupmean brain network. Notably, the rich club phenomenon
has been recently demonstrated in the human brain structural connectome (Collin et al., 2013; van den Heuvel et al.,
2012; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011). Intriguingly, the
normalized rich club coefﬁcient ˚norm showed invertedU shaped lifespan trajectories (p = 0.01, r2 = 0.10; Fig. 4B),
indicating that the brain’s functional rich club architecture increased until approximately 40 years of age and
decreased at older ages. These ﬁndings persisted over a
range of hub thresholds (Figs. 4A and S3). The 3D surface
visualizations of the results were implemented using the
Brain Net Viewer (www.nitrc.org/projects/bnv) (Xia et al.,
2013).
We also identiﬁed the brain regions showing signiﬁcant
age-related changes in the rFCS across the lifespan (Fig. 5,
p < 0.05, FDR-corrected). Linear age-related decreases in
rFCS were predominantly located in several default-mode
regions (bilateral medial prefrontal cortex), attention
regions (bilateral insula), visual cortex (bilateral middle
occipital gyrus and right calcarine) and subcortical regions
(bilateral putamen and left caudate; Fig. 5A). Part of the
left precuneus showed a linear decreasing trend with age
(p = 0.01, uncorrected; Figure S4 A). The rFCS of the left supplementary motor area, the right inferior temporal gyrus
and the left temporal pole increased signiﬁcantly with age
(Fig. 5A). The positive quadratic (U-shaped) trajectories of
rFCS with age were mainly located in the parahippocampus and thalamus (Fig. 5B). Negative quadratic age effects
(inverted-U shaped) were found in the lateral frontal, parietal and temporal regions (inferior frontal gyrus, precentral
gyrus, postcentral gyrus, inferior parietal gyrus, rolandic
operculum, middle temporal gyrus and inferior temporal
gyrus), and cuneus (Fig. 5B). Bilateral middle frontal gyrus,
medial superior frontal gyrus, and left intraparietal sulcus all showed a trend of negative quadratic age effects
(p < 0.01, uncorrected; Figure S4 B). Most of these agerelated regions were identiﬁed as hub regions. The rFCS
maps for every decade are shown in Fig. 3C.
3.1.3. Connectional properties
While the network density showed no signiﬁcant
age effects, the network mean connectivity strength
(p = 0.006, r2 = 0.28) and the network mean anatomical
distance (p < 0.001, r2 = 0.11) followed negative quadratic

82
M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93
Fig. 2. The lifespan trajectories of functional network efﬁciency and modularity. (A) The lifespan trajectory of absolute network global efﬁciency, local efﬁciency and modularity. (B) The lifespan trajectory of
relative network global efﬁciency, local efﬁciency and modularity. The dark dots represent the adjusted results of each subject after regressing out sex, head motion and image quality. The curve ﬁts are shown
by the dark lines; the red pentagrams represent the peak age. The solid lines show the signiﬁcant relationships, while the dotted lines show the non-signiﬁcant trends.

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

trajectories over the age range (Fig. 6A and B). The distanceassociated connection analyses revealed that the proportions of short-distance connections showed U-shaped
trajectories with age with peak ages at approximately 40
years (10–60 mm, ps < 0.02, r2 = 0.13 ± 0.03), while the proportions of long-distance connections showed inverted
U-shaped trajectories with peaks around 45 years of age
(70–140 mm, p < 0.01, r2 = 0.11± 0.038; Fig. 7A). It should
be noted that for both short- and long-distance connections, when the connections were longer, the peak
ages were older. In addition, the number of these connections showed no signiﬁcant age effect (p > 0.07). The
correlation strengths of both short- and long-distance connections exhibited negative quadratic age-related changes
(20–160 mm, p < 0.02, r2 = 0.13 ± 0.03); however, the connections shorter than 20 mm decreased linearly with age
(p < 0.01, r2 > 0.17; Fig. 7B).
3.2. Sex-related differences
Signiﬁcant sex differences were observed for
many global properties including global efﬁciency
(male > female, absolute: p = 0.001, relative: p < 0.001),
local efﬁciency (male > female, absolute: p = 0.01, relative:
p = 0.005; Figure S5). In addition, the network density
(p = 0.008) and connectivity strength (p = 0.02) were higher
in males than females (Figure S5). Other metrics such as
modularity and normalized rich club coefﬁcient showed
no signiﬁcant sex differences. For nodal properties, the
males showed higher connectivity strength in the left
supplementary motor area, insula and bilateral putamen (p < 0.05, FDR corrected). Only the cerebellum crus1
showed a signiﬁcant sex and age interaction effect (p < 0.05,
FDR corrected). We did not observe any signiﬁcant sex by
age interaction effects in any other network property (i.e.,
global or connectional).
3.3. Parcellation-scheme inﬂuences
Comparable results were obtained for other two lowresolution parcellation schemes. No signiﬁcant age-related
differences in network density were detected for either
template (L-Dos: p = 0.18; L-Yeo: p = 0.52). Furthermore,
all main topological ﬁndings obtained using the highresolution template were reproduced under at least
one low-resolution functional template (Fig. 8). Some
parcellation-based differences emerged. Speciﬁcally, we
observed linearly decreasing global and local efﬁciency
under the L-Dos template and preserved modularity and
connectivity strength under the L-Yeo template (Fig. 8).
Given the incomparability of nodal location across the various parcellation schemes, we did not describe the results
of the node and connection analyses.
3.4. Robustness of ﬁndings
Regarding network analysis without GSR, we observed
that several metrics, including the mean connectivity
strength, mean anatomical distance, global efﬁciency, local
efﬁciency, and normalized rich club coefﬁcients showed
age-related trajectories similar to the results with GSR,

83

whereas modularity became insensitive to age effects (Figure S6). Notably, because the network density showed no
signiﬁcant correlation with age (p = 0.32), we only calculated the global network properties of ‘absolute’ networks
here for the consideration of the calculated amount.
4. Discussion
We employed R-fMRI data and graph-theory methods to
systematically characterize topological age-related effects
in the global and regional organization of the human brain
functional connectome across the lifespan (7–85 years).
Several previous studies used the NKI-RS sample we used in
this work. Oler et al. (2012) and Laird et al. (2013) employed
subsets of the data to investigate the functional connectivity patterns of amygdala and visual cortex in healthy
people but did not focus the lifespan age effect. In contrast, Uddin and colleagues chose the developmental and
adulthood parts of the NKI-RS sample for replication analyses of the maturation of functional networks based upon
their datasets and conﬁrmed that functional hubs coupling is stronger in adults than that in children (Uddin
et al., 2011). This ﬁnding supports our observation of richclub in the functional connectomes across the human life
span. Using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) datasets of the
NKI-RS sample, Mwangi and colleagues replicated previous ﬁndings that the white matter microstructure exhibits
nonlinear changes across the lifespan and found the wholebrain DTI-derived scalar metrics can be useful for accurate
prediction of individual ages (Mwangi et al., 2013). Most
relevant to our work, using the same datasets, Yang and
colleagues demonstrated different lifespan trajectories of
the functional network connectivity derived by independent component analysis between the default network and
the precuneus network (Yang et al., 2013). The ﬁnding that
the precuneus network declines with age is consistent with
our nodal strength of network connectivity.
Beyond these consistent results, this study mainly characterizes topological age-related effects in the global and
regional network organization of the human brain functional connectome by using the graph theory. Our main
ﬁndings included the following: (i) the brain networks
showed preserved high topological global efﬁciency and
negative quadratic (inverted-U shaped) local efﬁciency;
(ii) the brain networks exhibited non-random modular
and rich club organization, which were adjusted over the
entire lifespan; (iii) heterogeneous age-related effects were
mainly localized to hub regions in the frontal, parietal
and occipital lobes; and (iv) brain functional connections showed age-related changes, which were distance
dependent. Collectively, we observed signiﬁcant topological modiﬁcation of the human brain functional connectome
across the lifespan, while the general structure of the connectomics was stable over time. These results may be
relevant for understanding the changes in neural circuits
that underlie age-related variation in cognition and behavior across the lifespan. These novel ﬁndings are discussed
below in details.
In our study, we found that the global efﬁciencies of
the brain functional networksshowed no signiﬁcant age
effect over the lifespan while local efﬁciency increased

84

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

Fig. 3. Whole-brain rFCS patterns. (A) The hub probability map across all subjects. For each individual subject, the hubs were deﬁned as the regions with
an rFCS greater than 1 SD beyond the mean. (B) The group-averaged rFCS map. (C) The adjusted rFCS maps for every decade. The adjusted rFCS values for
each region for different ages were obtained after regressing out sex, motion and image quality using the ﬁtted general linear models selected by AIC.

until about 30 years of age and then decreased in older
individuals. High global efﬁciency has been interpreted
as indicating an integrated network capable of rapid
information exchange among the distributed elements
(Bullmore and Sporns, 2012). A previous functional MRI

study reported no signiﬁcant changes in global efﬁciency
over development (Wu et al., 2013), which is consistent
with our results. When compared with adults, the global
efﬁciency of the brain functional networks in the elderly
has been detected as lower in the resting-state (Achard

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

85

Fig. 4. Rich-club organization and its lifespan trajectories. (A) The group mean rich-club coefﬁcient curve of brain functional networks for different hub
thresholds: rFCS > 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, and 1.5 SD of the mean. A dark gray line indicates ˚, a light gray line for ˚random and a red line for ˚norm . The ﬁgure shows
rich-club behavior of the functional brain networks, showing an increasing normalized rich-club coefﬁcient ˚norm for the threshold range. We show the
results of the rFCS > SD of the mean threshold to represent the main results. (B) Age-related change in ˚norm . The dark dots represent the adjusted results
of each subject after regressing out sex, head motion and data quality effects. The curve ﬁts are shown by the dark lines; the red pentagram represents
the peak age. (C) The rich-club origination of the group-averaged connectome. The red dots represent the hub regions, and the blue lines represent the
connections between them. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

and Bullmore, 2007) but maintained during the dominated hand grip task (Park et al., 2012). In addition, we
detected negative quadratic age effects on local efﬁciency
over the lifespan. The high local efﬁciency,which indicates highly clustered connections between topologically
nearby neighbors, has been suggested to be correlated with
efﬁcient information processing among functional specialized regions as well as high error tolerance (Bullmore and
Sporns, 2009; He and Evans, 2010; Sporns et al., 2005).
In this view, the inverted-U shaped change trajectory
of local efﬁciency supports the notion that functionally related regions or segregated functional processing
systems emerge during development (Fair et al., 2009),
optimize during adulthood and deteriorate with aging
(Meunier et al., 2009a). Previous functional brain network
studies have reported increases in local efﬁciency during
development and its reduction with aging (Achard and
Bullmore, 2007; Wu et al., 2013), which are consistent
with our results. The brain networks are both topologically

efﬁcient and prudently anatomically wired. Considering
that we also detected distance dependent changes of
connections in proportion and strength over the lifespan, the trade-offs between efﬁciency and energetic costs
may result in the maintained global efﬁciency and negative quadratic local efﬁciency over the entire age range
(Bullmore and Sporns, 2012). Collectivity, we demonstrated the changing trajectories of functional network
efﬁciency over the entire lifespan.
Modularity is a central organizational principle for brain
networks, and a modular structure enables adaptability or
evolvability for information processing through the formation of relatively independent functional communities,
within which regional nodes are densely interconnected
(Kirschner and Gerhart, 1998; Meunier et al., 2010, 2009b).
Thus, modularity is a related topological property with
clustering that favors specialized or segregated information processing in the brain networks. From the perspective
of the entire lifespan, we demonstrated that the brain func-

86
M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93
Fig. 5. Lifespan rFCS changes. (A) The regions showing signiﬁcant linear age effects. (B) The regions showing signiﬁcant quadratic age effects. p < 0.05, FDR correction was performed to correct for multiple
comparisons. The bottom row shows the developmental trajectories of certain, typical regions. INS.L, left insula; MPFC.Rm right medial prefrontal cortex; HIP.L, left hippocampus; SMG.R, right supramarginal
gyrus. The dark dots represent the results of each subject after adjusting for sex, head motion and data quality. The curve ﬁts are shown by the dark lines; the red dot pentagrams represent the peak age. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

87

Fig. 6. Lifespan trajectories of the network mean connectivity strength and network mean anatomical distance. The dark dots represent the results of
each subject after adjusting for sex, head motion and data quality. The curve ﬁts are shown by the dark lines; the red dots represent the peak age. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

tional networks exhibit a nonrandom optimized modular
structure, which suggests that the key aspects of the functional connectomics are conserved over the lifespan. We
found a linear decrease in modularity over the lifespan.
Previous studies have reported modularity to be consistent
throughout brain development (Fair et al., 2009) and aging
(Meunier et al., 2009a). This inconsistency may be related
to the age range distribution, as the developmental period
only accounts for approximately one quarter of the entire
lifespan and these papers employed the method of groups
comparison. Network construction methods and network
complexity/template resolution may also contribute to the
conﬂicting results.
Hub regions are believed to play vital roles in establishing and maintaining efﬁcient global communication among
parallel, distributed brain systems. Consistent with previous works (Cole et al., 2010; Liang et al., 2013; Tomasi
and Volkow, 2011; Zuo et al., 2012), we observed that
the brain’s functional hub regions were predominantly
located in the default-mode, attention and visual networks.
Notably, the brain hub spatial locations were preserved
across the human lifespan, which reﬂects their relatively
stable roles. Hwang and colleagues also reported that functional hubs are stable over development (Hwang et al.,
2013). Recently, seminal works by van den Heuvel and
Sporns have demonstrated the richness of hub connections
in the human brain structural network of white-matter
ﬁbers in healthy adults (Collin et al., 2013; van den Heuvel
et al., 2012; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011, 2013). Significantly denser connections between hub regions compared
with non-hub regions form the rich club organization,
which is high-cost but provides signiﬁcant functional beneﬁts by enhancing not only global information ﬂow but
also the resilience of the network to hub attacks. In this
study, we observed the existence of rich club organization
in the functional network over the lifespan. Interestingly,
the rich club structure demonstrated signiﬁcantly negative
quadratic age effects. As the rich club organization makes
important contributions to interregional information trafﬁc and cognitive values in healthy populations (Bullmore
and Sporns, 2012; van den Heuvel et al., 2012), changes

with inverted U-shapes of this core architecture may correlate with high cognitive function changes over the lifespan
(Casey et al., 2000). Besides, previous ﬁndings about the
formation and degeneration of high functioning components (Fair et al., 2008; Luna et al., 2010; Supekar et al.,
2010; Tomasi and Volkow, 2012), may be inﬂuenced by
the rich club changes. Similar lifespan trajectories of the
rich club organization and the strength and proportion of
long-distance connections may indicate that communication within these rich club regions plays a central role
in long-distance brain communication and in optimizing
global brain communication efﬁciency for healthy cognitive brain functioning (van den Heuvel et al., 2012, 2009;
van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011).
Age-related changes in the regional nodal properties
were predominately found in highly connected regions
such as default-mode, attention and visual regions. The
correlation strength of medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus
and insula regions linearly decreased with age. The default
mode and attention network regions have been reported to
decrease with aging (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; Tomasi
and Volkow, 2012). The left supplementary motor area
increased linearly over the lifespan. Previous studies have
found increased connectivity of this region during both
development (Wu et al., 2013) and aging (Tomasi and
Volkow, 2012). U-shaped lifespan trajectories were found
in thalamus, which is consistent with previous ﬁndings of
the rewiring and pruning of subcortical-cortical connectivity during development (Supekar et al., 2009) as well
as increasing correlation strength during aging (Tomasi
and Volkow, 2012). Inverted U-shape lifespan trajectories
were found mainly in the dorsal attention and language
regions, such as the bilateral middle frontal gyrus, precentral gyrus, left intraparietal sulcus, medial superior frontal
gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus, inferior parietal gyrus, rolandic
operculum, middle temporal gyrus and inferior temporal
gyrus, which appear to be among the last brain regions
to mature and which have been related to increasing
cognitive capacity during childhood (Casey et al., 2000).
In the recent remarkable work by Power and colleagues
(Power et al., 2013), they reported that degree-based hubs

88
M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93
Fig. 7. Distance-dependent changes in the patterns of connectivity across the lifespan. The functional connections were divided into 17 bins based on anatomical distances (in 10-mm steps). The relationships
between the numbers/strengths of the connections of each bin and age were explored. (A) The lifespan trajectories of connection numbers. (B) The lifespan trajectories of connection strengths. Color represents
the signiﬁcance of the age effects. Bottom row: typical lifespan trajectories of different changes. The dark dots represent the adjusted results of each subject after regressing out sex, head motion and data quality.
The curve ﬁts are shown by the dark lines; the red dots represent the peak age. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

89

Fig. 8. The lifespan trajectories of network properties under two low-resolution parcellation schemes. L-Dos, low-resolution Dosenbach et al.’s functional
atlas. L-Yeo, low-resolution Yeo et al.’s functional atlas. The dark dots represent the adjusted results of each subject after regressing out sex, head motion
and data quality. The curve ﬁts are shown by the dark lines; the red dots represent the peak age. The solid lines show the signiﬁcant relationships, while
the dotted lines show the non-signiﬁcant trends. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version
of this article.)

(which we used in the current work) may heavily rely
on the subsystem sizes. In this case, the fact that the
aging effects mainly target the highly connected regions
may indicate that these brain functional network systems altered over the lifespan. Power and colleagues also
found that metrics like participant coefﬁcient will perform better in reﬂecting the regions’ role or centrality in
information transformation. The work of Zuo et al. also
suggested that multiple centrality metrics should be considered to characterize different aspects of network hubs
in applications (Zuo et al., 2012). In that study, sub-graph
centrality tended more robust to community sizes. Future
work should explore the age effects on regions from different perspectives of the information ﬂow in the functional
connectomics with uses of multiple centrality measures.

We observed that the adjustment of the human functional connectome over the lifespan was characterized
by both functional connectivity and anatomical distance.
The proportions of short- and long-distance connectivity showed inverted change trajectories: the proportion
of short-distance connections decreased during development and subsequently increased with aging, while
that of the long-distance connections showed the opposite change trajectories. The correlation strength of both
short- and long-connections exhibited inverted U-shape
change trajectories. Previous studies have demonstrated
that short-distance functional connectivity is greater in
children than adults (Dosenbach et al., 2010; Fair et al.,
2009; Supekar et al., 2009) and predicts brain maturation (Dosenbach et al., 2010). Long-distance connections

90

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

are enhanced during development (Fair et al., 2009; Kelly
et al., 2009; Supekar et al., 2009) and then become vulnerable to aging effects (Tomasi and Volkow, 2012). Previous
work of Supekar et al. (2009) demonstrated that connectivity rewiring at the neuronal level also operates at the
systems level to help brain reconﬁguration. To such a
point, the synaptic pruning, which extends through childhood and adolescence (Huttenlocher et al., 1982), and the
inverted U-shaped white matter volume change (Giedd
and Rapoport, 2010; Good et al., 2001; Salat et al., 2005;
Sowell et al., 2003), which involves maturation of ﬁbers,
myelination, decrease of myelin density and myelination
of white ﬁbers, might explain the connection changes over
the lifespan. These ﬁndings indicate that the brain connectome adaption continues through the lifespan, which
may correlate with underlying structural wiring changes.
Importantly, our ﬁndings provide a roadmap of the speciﬁc
function maturation and degeneration of brain pathways,
i.e., ‘local, become distributed and then revert back to local’.
In addition, short-distance connections were observed to
be greater than long-distance connections through the
lifespan in terms of intensity. This ﬁnding supports an economy in anatomical wiring costs in the human connectome
(Bullmore and Sporns, 2012) that has been consistently
demonstrated across species (Alexander-Bloch et al., 2013;
Markov et al., 2011).
The construction of functional brain network is also
modulated by sex. We detected signiﬁcant sex effects on
network efﬁciency, network density, correlation strength
and some regions. Males showed a signiﬁcantly higher
network density and correlation strength than females.
Thus, we inferred that males have higher cost than females,
which is consistent with previous white matter structural
network ﬁndings (Gong et al., 2009). Previous studies have
also detected a signiﬁcantly higher global efﬁciency of functional brain connectomics in males than females, while no
differences was found with regard to local efﬁciency (Wu
et al., 2013). Both females and males showed a similar
and preserved module and rich-club structure. For nodal
property, the regions related to motion showed a signiﬁcantly higher correlation strength in males compared with
females, which is consistent with previous ﬁndings (Zuo
et al., 2012).
Several issues should be considered in interpreting the
current ﬁndings. First, we regressed out the global signal to partly reduce physiological and other global noise.
We also repeated analyses without global signal regression and found that most of our ﬁndings were conserved,
and the modularity failed to detect age effects. This ﬁnding might be an indication of the fact that global signal
removing reduces the effects of physiological and other
noise across the whole brain and makes the metrics more
comparable across participants. Second, to mitigate the
effects of in-scanner head motion, we used the Friston24 regression model in the preprocessing and added a
motion-related parameter, meanFD, in group level, which
has been proven to be a promising way to reduce the impact
of motion artifacts on both individual and group-level
outcomes (Yan et al., 2013). However, the effects of residual
motion may remain in our results. Speciﬁcally, head movement has been found to have a distinct impact on long- and

short-connections, and it signiﬁcantly correlates with age
(Mowinckel et al., 2012; Power et al., 2012; Satterthwaite
et al., 2012; Van Dijk et al., 2012), implying a complex
role of head motion in the changes of distance-dependent
connectivity. This important issue should be studied carefully in future. Third, it is challenging to map the brain’s
parcellation-based functional connectome appropriately
and precisely (Butts, 2009; Smith et al., 2011). We used a
random-generated high-resolution template and showed
the repeatability of most of our ﬁndings across different parcellation schemes. Notably, non-uniform ﬁndings
between templates were also observed, which may originate from the differences in brain units. These ﬁndings
indicate that the age effects on functional networks
were template dependent. Nevertheless, the development
and adoption of novel network tools and whole-brain
connectivity-based parcellation approaches in the future
will provide additional insight into the age effects on the
functional connectome. Fourth, we attempted to explore
the age-related differences of brain functional networks
over a continuous age range that covered both development and aging. However, the analyzed samples were
not perfectly distributed across the entire lifespan. The
number of young adults was greater than the number of
older people. We employed linear and quadratic (nonlinear) models to explore the age changes across the human
lifespan. The incomplete distribution of ages in our sample may have affected parametric curve ﬁtting. Exploration
of larger R-fMRI datasets using non-parametrical models
(e.g., smoothing splines) may reveal more robust and complex maturational processes (Fjell and Walhovd, 2010).
Finally, the age-related functional connectome changes
were detected based on the cross-sectional data and thus
could be potentially inﬂuenced by unbalanced cohort distributions. Because different age cohorts may be different
in substantive ways, investigations of the longitudinal network dynamics should be taken in the future to reveal
the nature of age-related changes (Fjell and Walhovd,
2010).

5. Conclusions
We detected signiﬁcant age-related changes modeled
by the lifespan trajectories of the functional connectome.
These ﬁndings may provide novel insights into the neural
substrates underlying the behavioral and cognitive variability over the lifespan, which require veriﬁcation in the
future by combining the neuroimaging data and behavioral
measurements. The present study reveals the dynamics of
the topological organization of the intrinsic network architecture in the functional connectomics across the human
lifespan and provides a baseline for evaluating the network
impairments of various neuropsychiatric disorders.

Conﬂict of interest statement
All authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Andrew Zalesky for sharing codes to generate high-resolution parcellation atlas, Thomas Yeo for
providing the functional parcellation of the cerebral cortex
and Caitlin Hinz for the contribution of language editing.
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation (Grant Nos. 81030028, 31221003 and 81171409), the
National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars
(Grant No. 81225012, YH), the Major Joint Fund for International Cooperation and Exchange of the National Natural
Science Foundation (Grant No. 81220108014, XNZ), the
Open Research Fund of the Key Laboratory of Behavioral
Science, the Startup Foundation for Distinguished Research
Professor (Y0CX492S03, XNZ) from Institute of Psychology, the Hundred Talents Program and the Key Research
Program (KSZD-EW-TZ-002, XNZ) of Chinese Academy of
Sciences.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can
be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.dcn.2013.11.004.
References
Achard, S., Bullmore, E., 2007. Efﬁciency and cost of economical brain
functional networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 3, e17.
Akaike, H., 1974. A new look at statistical-model identiﬁcation. IEEE Trans.
Automat. Control 19, 716–723.
Alavi, A., Newberg, A.B., Souder, E., Berlin, J.A., 1993. Quantitative analysis of PET and MRI data in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease:
atrophy weighted total brain metabolism and absolute whole brain
metabolism as reliable discriminators. J. Nucl. Med. 34, 1681–1687.
Alexander-Bloch, A.F., Vertes, P.E., Stidd, R., Lalonde, F., Clasen, L.,
Rapoport, J., Giedd, J., Bullmore, E.T., Gogtay, N., 2013. The anatomical
distance of functional connections predicts brain network topology in
health and schizophrenia. Cereb. Cortex 23, 127–138.
Andrews-Hanna, J.R., Snyder, A.Z., Vincent, J.L., Lustig, C., Head, D., Raichle,
M.E., Buckner, R.L., 2007. Disruption of large-scale brain systems in
advanced aging. Neuron 56, 924–935.
Asato, M.R., Terwilliger, R., Woo, J., Luna, B., 2010. White matter development in adolescence: a DTI study. Cereb. Cortex 20, 2122–2131.
Bassett, D.S., Bullmore, E.T., 2009. Human brain networks in health and
disease. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 22, 340–347.
Biswal, B., Yetkin, F.Z., Haughton, V.M., Hyde, J.S., 1995. Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar
MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 34, 537–541.
Biswal, B.B., Mennes, M., Zuo, X.N., Gohel, S., Kelly, C., Smith, S.M., Beckmann, C.F., Adelstein, J.S., Buckner, R.L., Colcombe, S., Dogonowski,
A.M., Ernst, M., Fair, D., Hampson, M., Hoptman, M.J., Hyde, J.S.,
Kiviniemi, V.J., Kotter, R., Li, S.J., Lin, C.P., Lowe, M.J., Mackay, C., Madden, D.J., Madsen, K.H., Margulies, D.S., Mayberg, H.S., McMahon, K.,
Monk, C.S., Mostofsky, S.H., Nagel, B.J., Pekar, J.J., Peltier, S.J., Petersen,
S.E., Riedl, V., Rombouts, S.A.R.B., Rypma, B., Schlaggar, B.L., Schmidt,
S., Seidler, R.D., Siegle, G.J., Sorg, C., Teng, G.J., Veijola, J., Villringer, A.,
Walter, M., Wang, L., Weng, X.C., Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli, S., Williamson, P.,
Windischberger, C., Zang, Y.F., Zhang, H.Y., Castellanos, F.X., Milham,
M.P., 2010. Toward discovery science of human brain function. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 4734–4739.
Buckner, R.L., Sepulcre, J., Talukdar, T., Krienen, F.M., Liu, H., Hedden,
T., Andrews-Hanna, J.R., Sperling, R.A., Johnson, K.A., 2009. Cortical
hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 29,
1860–1873.
Bullmore, E., Sporns, O., 2009. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical
analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10,
186–198.
Bullmore, E., Sporns, O., 2012. The economy of brain network organization.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 336–349.

91

Butts, C.T., 2009. Revisiting the foundations of network analysis. Science
325, 414–416.
Casey, B.J., Giedd, J.N., Thomas, K.M., 2000. Structural and functional brain
development and its relation to cognitive development. Biol. Psychol.
54, 241–257.
Chugani, H.T., Phelps, M.E., Mazziotta, J.C., 1987. Positron emission tomography study of human brain functional development. Ann. Neurol. 22,
487–497.
Clarke, A.R., Barry, R.J., McCarthy, R., Selikowitz, M., 2001. Age and sex
effects in the EEG: development of the normal child. Clin. Neurophysiol. 112, 806–814.
Cole, M.W., Pathak, S., Schneider, W., 2010. Identifying the brain’s most
globally connected regions. Neuroimage 49, 3132–3148.
Collin, G., Sporns, O., Mandl, R.C., van den Heuvel, M.P., 2013. Structural and functional aspects relating to cost and beneﬁt of rich
club organization in the human cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bht064.
Damoiseaux, J.S., Beckmann, C.F., Arigita, E.J., Barkhof, F., Scheltens, P.,
Stam, C.J., Smith, S.M., Rombouts, S.A., 2008. Reduced resting-state
brain activity in the “default network” in normal aging. Cereb. Cortex
18, 1856–1864.
de Reus, M.A., van den Heuvel, M.P., 2013. The parcellation-based connectome: limitations and extensions. Neuroimage 80, 397–404.
Dosenbach, N.U., Nardos, B., Cohen, A.L., Fair, D.A., Power, J.D., Church,
J.A., Nelson, S.M., Wig, G.S., Vogel, A.C., Lessov-Schlaggar, C.N., Barnes,
K.A., Dubis, J.W., Feczko, E., Coalson, R.S., Pruett Jr., J.R., Barch, D.M.,
Petersen, S.E., Schlaggar, B.L., 2010. Prediction of individual brain
maturity using fMRI. Science 329, 1358–1361.
Fair, D.A., Cohen, A.L., Dosenbach, N.U., Church, J.A., Miezin, F.M., Barch,
D.M., Raichle, M.E., Petersen, S.E., Schlaggar, B.L., 2008. The maturing
architecture of the brain’s default network. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
105, 4028–4032.
Fair, D.A., Cohen, A.L., Power, J.D., Dosenbach, N.U., Church, J.A., Miezin,
F.M., Schlaggar, B.L., Petersen, S.E., 2009. Functional brain networks
develop from a “local to distributed” organization. PLoS Comput. Biol.
5, e1000381.
Fair, D.A., Dosenbach, N.U., Church, J.A., Cohen, A.L., Brahmbhatt, S.,
Miezin, F.M., Barch, D.M., Raichle, M.E., Petersen, S.E., Schlaggar, B.L., 2007. Development of distinct control networks through
segregation and integration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104,
13507–13512.
Fjell, A.M., Walhovd, K.B., 2010. Structural brain changes in aging:
courses, causes and cognitive consequences. Rev. Neurosci. 21,
187–221.
Fornito, A., Zalesky, A., Bullmore, E.T., 2010. Network scaling effects in
graph analytic studies of human resting-state FMRI data. Front. Syst.
Neurosci. 4, 22.
Fox, M.D., Raichle, M.E., 2007. Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 8, 700–711.
Fox, M.D., Zhang, D., Snyder, A.Z., Raichle, M.E., 2009. The global signal and
observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks. J. Neurophysiol.
101, 3270–3283.
Friston, K.J., Williams, S., Howard, R., Frackowiak, R.S., Turner, R., 1996.
Movement-related effects in fMRI time-series. Magn. Reson. Med. 35,
346–355.
Giedd, J.N., Rapoport, J.L., 2010. Structural MRI of pediatric brain development: what have we learned and where are we going? Neuron 67,
728–734.
Gong, G., Rosa-Neto, P., Carbonell, F., Chen, Z.J., He, Y., Evans, A.C., 2009.
Age- and gender-related differences in the cortical anatomical network. J. Neurosci. 29, 15684–15693.
Good, C.D., Johnsrude, I.S., Ashburner, J., Henson, R.N., Friston, K.J., Frackowiak, R.S., 2001. A voxel-based morphometric study of ageing in 465
normal adult human brains. Neuroimage 14, 21–36.
Grady, C.L., Springer, M.V., Hongwanishkul, D., McIntosh, A.R., Winocur, G.,
2006. Age-related changes in brain activity across the adult lifespan.
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 18, 227–241.
Hayasaka, S., Laurienti, P.J., 2010. Comparison of characteristics between
region-and voxel-based network analyses in resting-state fMRI data.
Neuroimage 50, 499–508.
He, Y., Dagher, A., Chen, Z., Charil, A., Zijdenbos, A., Worsley, K., Evans, A.,
2009. Impaired small-world efﬁciency in structural cortical networks
in multiple sclerosis associated with white matter lesion load. Brain
132, 3366–3379.
He, Y., Evans, A., 2010. Graph theoretical modeling of brain connectivity.
Curr. Opin. Neurol. 23, 341–350.
Hurvich, C., Tsai, C., 1989. Regression and time-series model selection in
small samples. Biometrika 76, 297–307.

92

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93

Huttenlocher, P.R., De Courten, C., Garey, L.J., Van der Loos, H., 1982.
Synaptic development in human cerebral cortex. Int. J. Neurol. 16–17,
144–154.
Hwang, K., Hallquist, M.N., Luna, B., 2013. The development of hub architecture in the human functional brain network. Cereb Cortex 23,
2380–2393.
Kelly, A.M., Di Martino, A., Uddin, L.Q., Shehzad, Z., Gee, D.G., Reiss, P.T.,
Margulies, D.S., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., 2009. Development of
anterior cingulate functional connectivity from late childhood to early
adulthood. Cereb. Cortex 19, 640–657.
Kelly, C., Biswal, B.B., Craddock, R.C., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., 2012.
Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and
pitfalls. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 181–188.
Kirschner, M., Gerhart, J., 1998. Evolvability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95,
8420–8427.
Laird, A.R., Eickhoff, S.B., Rottschy, C., Bzdok, D., Ray, K.L., Fox, P.T., 2013.
Networks of task co-activations. Neuroimage 80, 505–514.
Latora, V., Marchiori, M., 2001. Efﬁcient behavior of small-world networks.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 198701.
Latora, V., Marchiori, M., 2003. Economic small-world behavior in
weighted networks. Eur. Phys. J. B – Condens. Matter 32, 249–263.
Lebel, C., Gee, M., Camicioli, R., Wieler, M., Martin, W., Beaulieu, C., 2012.
Diffusion tensor imaging of white matter tract evolution over the
lifespan. Neuroimage 60, 340–352.
Liang, X., Zou, Q., He, Y., Yang, Y., 2013. Coupling of functional connectivity and regional cerebral blood ﬂow reveals a physiological basis
for network hubs of the human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110,
1929–1934.
Luna, B., Padmanabhan, A., O’Hearn, K., 2010. What has fMRI told us about
the development of cognitive control through adolescence? Brain
Cogn. 72, 101–113.
Markov, N.T., Misery, P., Falchier, A., Lamy, C., Vezoli, J., Quilodran, R.,
Gariel, M.A., Giroud, P., Ercsey-Ravasz, M., Pilaz, L.J., Huissoud, C.,
Barone, P., Dehay, C., Toroczkai, Z., Van Essen, D.C., Kennedy, H.,
Knoblauch, K., 2011. Weight consistency speciﬁes regularities of
macaque cortical networks. Cereb. Cortex 21, 1254–1272.
Maslov, S., Sneppen, K., 2002. Speciﬁcity and stability in topology of protein networks. Science 296, 910–913.
Meunier, D., Achard, S., Morcom, A., Bullmore, E., 2009a. Age-related
changes in modular organization of human brain functional networks.
Neuroimage 44, 715–723.
Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., Bullmore, E.T., 2010. Modular and hierarchically modular organization of brain networks. Front. Neurosci. 4, 200.
Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., Fornito, A., Ersche, K.D., Bullmore, E.T., 2009b.
Hierarchical modularity in human brain functional networks. Front.
Neuroinform. 3, 37.
Mowinckel, A.M., Espeseth, T., Westlye, L.T., 2012. Network-speciﬁc
effects of age and in-scanner subject motion: a resting-state fMRI
study of 238 healthy adults. Neuroimage 63, 1364–1373.
Murphy, K., Birn, R.M., Handwerker, D.A., Jones, T.B., Bandettini, P.A., 2009.
The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: are
anti-correlated networks introduced? Neuroimage 44, 893–905.
Mwangi, B., Hasan, K.M., Soares, J.C., 2013. Prediction of individual subject’s age across the human lifespan using diffusion tensor imaging: a
machine learning approach. Neuroimage 75, 58–67.
Newman, M.E., 2006. Modularity and community structure in networks.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 8577–8582.
Nooner, K.B., Colcombe, S.J., Tobe, R.H., Mennes, M., Benedict, M.M.,
Moreno, A.L., Panek, L.J., Brown, S., Zavitz, S.T., Li, Q., Sikka, S., Gutman, D., Bangaru, S., Schlachter, R.T., Kamiel, S.M., Anwar, A.R., Hinz,
C.M., Kaplan, M.S., Rachlin, A.B., Adelsberg, S., Cheung, B., Khanuja, R.,
Yan, C., Craddock, C.C., Calhoun, V., Courtney, W., King, M., Wood, D.,
Cox, C.L., Kelly, A.M., Di Martino, A., Petkova, E., Reiss, P.T., Duan, N.,
Thomsen, D., Biswal, B., Coffey, B., Hoptman, M.J., Javitt, D.C., Pomara,
N., Sidtis, J.J., Koplewicz, H.S., Castellanos, F.X., Leventhal, B.L., Milham, M.P., 2012. The NKI-rockland sample: a model for accelerating
the pace of discovery science in psychiatry. Front. Neurosci. 6, 152.
Oler, J.A., Birn, R.M., Patriat, R., Fox, A.S., Shelton, S.E., Burghy, C.A.,
Stodola, D.E., Essex, M.J., Davidson, R.J., Kalin, N.H., 2012. Evidence
for coordinated functional activity within the extended amygdala of
non-human and human primates. Neuroimage 61, 1059–1066.
Park, C.H., Boudrias, M.H., Rossiter, H., Ward, N.S., 2012. Age-related
changes in the topological architecture of the brain during hand grip.
Neurobiol. Aging 33, 833 e827–e837.
Polich, J., 1997. EEG and ERP assessment of normal aging. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 104, 244–256.
Power, J.D., Barnes, K.A., Snyder, A.Z., Schlaggar, B.L., Petersen, S.E., 2012.
Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI
networks arise from subject motion. Neuroimage 59, 2142–2154.

Power, J.D., Schlaggar, B.L., Lessov-Schlaggar, C.N., Petersen, S.E., 2013.
Evidence for hubs in human functional brain networks. Neuron 79,
798–813.
Rubinov, M., Sporns, O., 2010. Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage 52, 1059–1069.
Salat, D.H., Buckner, R.L., Snyder, A.Z., Greve, D.N., Desikan, R.S., Busa, E.,
Morris, J.C., Dale, A.M., Fischl, B., 2004. Thinning of the cerebral cortex
in aging. Cereb. Cortex 14, 721–730.
Salat, D.H., Tuch, D.S., Greve, D.N., van der Kouwe, A.J., Hevelone, N.D.,
Zaleta, A.K., Rosen, B.R., Fischl, B., Corkin, S., Rosas, H.D., Dale, A.M.,
2005. Age-related alterations in white matter microstructure measured by diffusion tensor imaging. Neurobiol. Aging 26, 1215–1227.
Satterthwaite, T.D., Wolf, D.H., Loughead, J., Ruparel, K., Elliott, M.A.,
Hakonarson, H., Gur, R.C., Gur, R.E., 2012. Impact of in-scanner head
motion on multiple measures of functional connectivity: relevance for
studies of neurodevelopment in youth. Neuroimage 60, 623–632.
Shaw, P., Kabani, N.J., Lerch, J.P., Eckstrand, K., Lenroot, R., Gogtay, N.,
Greenstein, D., Clasen, L., Evans, A., Rapoport, J.L., Giedd, J.N., Wise, S.P.,
2008. Neurodevelopmental trajectories of the human cerebral cortex.
J. Neurosci. 28, 3586–3594.
Smith, S.M., Miller, K.L., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Webster, M., Beckmann, C.F.,
Nichols, T.E., Ramsey, J.D., Woolrich, M.W., 2011. Network modelling
methods for FMRI. Neuroimage 54, 875–891.
Sowell, E.R., Peterson, B.S., Thompson, P.M., Welcome, S.E., Henkenius, A.L.,
Toga, A.W., 2003. Mapping cortical change across the human life span.
Nat. Neurosci. 6, 309–315.
Sporns, O., Tononi, G., Kotter, R., 2005. The human connectome: a structural description of the human brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 1, e42.
Stam, C.J., 2010. Characterization of anatomical and functional connectivity in the brain: a complex networks perspective. Int. J. Psychophysiol.
77, 186–194.
Supekar, K., Musen, M., Menon, V., 2009. Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children. PLoS Biol. 7, e1000157.
Supekar, K., Uddin, L.Q., Prater, K., Amin, H., Greicius, M.D., Menon,
V., 2010. Development of functional and structural connectivity
within the default mode network in young children. Neuroimage 52,
290–301.
Tanna, N.K., Kohn, M.I., Horwich, D.N., Jolles, P.R., Zimmerman, R.A., Alves,
W.M., Alavi, A., 1991. Analysis of brain and cerebrospinal ﬂuid volumes
with MR imaging: impact on PET data correction for atrophy. Part II.
Aging and Alzheimer dementia. Radiology 178, 123–130.
Thomason, M.E., Chang, C.E., Glover, G.H., Gabrieli, J.D., Greicius, M.D.,
Gotlib, I.H., 2008. Default-mode function and task-induced deactivation have overlapping brain substrates in children. Neuroimage 41,
1493–1503.
Tomasi, D., Volkow, N.D., 2011. Functional connectivity hubs in the human
brain. Neuroimage 57, 908–917.
Tomasi, D., Volkow, N.D., 2012. Aging and functional brain networks. Mol.
Psychiatry 17 (471), 458–549.
Uddin, L.Q., Supekar, K.S., Ryali, S., Menon, V., 2011. Dynamic reconﬁguration of structural and functional connectivity across core
neurocognitive brain networks with development. J. Neurosci. 31,
18578–18589.
van den Heuvel, M.P., Kahn, R.S., Goni, J., Sporns, O., 2012. High-cost, highcapacity backbone for global brain communication. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 109, 11372–11377.
van den Heuvel, M.P., Sporns, O., 2011. Rich club organization of the human
connectome. J. Neurosci. 31, 15775–15786.
van den Heuvel, M.P., Sporns, O., 2013. An anatomical substrate for integration among functional networks in human cortex. J. Neurosci. 33,
14489–14500.
van den Heuvel, M.P., Stam, C.J., Boersma, M., Hulshoff Pol, H.E., 2008.
Small-world and scale-free organization of voxel-based resting-state
functional connectivity in the human brain. Neuroimage 43, 528–539.
van den Heuvel, M.P., Stam, C.J., Kahn, R.S., Hulshoff Pol, H.E., 2009. Efﬁciency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance. J.
Neurosci. 29, 7619–7624.
Van Dijk, K.R., Sabuncu, M.R., Buckner, R.L., 2012. The inﬂuence of head
motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Neuroimage 59,
431–438.
van Wijk, B.C., Stam, C.J., Daffertshofer, A., 2010. Comparing brain networks of different size and connectivity density using graph theory.
PLoS ONE 5, e13701.
Vogel, A.C., Church, J.A., Power, J.D., Miezin, F.M., Petersen, S.E., Schlaggar,
B.L., 2013. Functional network architecture of reading-related regions
across development. Brain Lang. 125, 231–243.
Wang, J., Wang, L., Zang, Y., Yang, H., Tang, H., Gong, Q., Chen, Z., Zhu, C., He,
Y., 2009. Parcellation-dependent small-world brain functional networks: a resting-state fMRI study. Hum. Brain Mapp. 30, 1511–1523.

M. Cao et al. / Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 7 (2014) 76–93
Wang, L., Su, L., Shen, H., Hu, D., 2012. Decoding lifespan changes of the
human brain using resting-state functional connectivity MRI. PLoS
ONE 7, e44530.
Westlye, L.T., Walhovd, K.B., Dale, A.M., Bjornerud, A., Due-Tonnessen, P.,
Engvig, A., Grydeland, H., Tamnes, C.K., Ostby, Y., Fjell, A.M., 2010.
Life-span changes of the human brain white matter: diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) and volumetry. Cereb. Cortex 20, 2055–2068.
Wu, J.T., Wu, H.Z., Yan, C.G., Chen, W.X., Zhang, H.Y., He, Y., Yang, H.S.,
2011. Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anticorrelated networks: a resting-state fMRI study. Neurosci. Lett. 504,
62–67.
Wu, K., Taki, Y., Sato, K., Hashizume, H., Sassa, Y., Takeuchi, H., Thyreau, B.,
He, Y., Evans, A.C., Li, X., Kawashima, R., Fukuda, H., 2013. Topological
organization of functional brain networks in healthy children: differences in relation to age, sex, and intelligence. PLoS ONE 8, e55347.
Xia, M., Wang, J., He, Y., 2013. BrainNet Viewer: a network visualization
tool for human brain connectomics, PLoS One. 8, e68910.
Yan, C.G., Cheung, B., Kelly, C., Colcombe, S., Craddock, R.C., Di Martino, A.,
Li, Q., Zuo, X.N., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., 2013. A comprehensive
assessment of regional variation in the impact of head micromovements on functional connectomics. Neuroimage 76, 183–201.
Yang, Z., Chang, C., Xu, T., Jiang, L., Handwerker, D.A., Castellanos, F.X.,
Milham, M.P., Bandettini, P.A., Zuo, X.N., 2013. Connectivity trajectory
across lifespan differentiates the precuneus from the default network.
Neuroimage, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.039.

93

Yeo, B.T., Krienen, F.M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M.R., Lashkari, D.,
Hollinshead, M., Roffman, J.L., Smoller, J.W., Zollei, L., Polimeni, J.R.,
Fischl, B., Liu, H., Buckner, R.L., 2011. The organization of the human
cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1125–1165.
Zalesky, A., Fornito, A., Harding, I.H., Cocchi, L., Yucel, M., Pantelis, C., Bullmore, E.T., 2010. Whole-brain anatomical networks: does the choice
of nodes matter? Neuroimage 50, 970–983.
Ziegler, G., Dahnke, R., Jancke, L., Yotter, R.A., May, A., Gaser, C., 2012. Brain
structural trajectories over the adult lifespan. Hum. Brain Mapp. 33,
2377–2389.
Zuo, X.N., Ehmke, R., Mennes, M., Imperati, D., Castellanos, F.X., Sporns,
O., Milham, M.P., 2012. Network centrality in the human functional
connectome. Cereb. Cortex 22, 1862–1875.
Zuo, X.N., Kelly, C., Di Martino, A., Mennes, M., Margulies, D.S., Bangaru,
S., Grzadzinski, R., Evans, A.C., Zang, Y.F., Castellanos, F.X., Milham,
M.P., 2010. Growing together and growing apart: regional and sex
differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional
homotopy. J. Neurosci. 30, 15034–15043.
Zuo, X.N., Xu, T., Jiang, L., Yang, Z., Cao, X.Y., He, Y., Zang, Y.F., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., 2013. Toward reliable characterization of
functional homogeneity in the human brain: preprocessing, scan
duration, imaging resolution and computational space. Neuroimage
65, 374–386.

