Accepted Manuscript
Title: Different involvement of subregions within dorsal
premotor and medial frontal cortex for pro- and antisaccades
Author: Edna C. Cieslik Isabelle Seidler Angela R. Laird
Peter T. Fox Simon B. Eickhoff
PII:
DOI:
Reference:

S0149-7634(15)30292-X
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.05.012
NBR 2437

To appear in:
Received date:
Revised date:
Accepted date:

17-11-2015
1-4-2016
17-5-2016

Please cite this article as: Cieslik, Edna C., Seidler, Isabelle, Laird, Angela R., Fox, Peter
T., Eickhoff, Simon B., Different involvement of subregions within dorsal premotor
and medial frontal cortex for pro- and antisaccades.Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.05.012
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof
before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that
apply to the journal pertain.

Title: Different involvement of subregions within dorsal premotor and medial
frontal cortex for pro- and antisaccades

Authors: Edna C. Cieslik a,b,*, Isabelle Seidler a,*, Angela R. Laird c,d, Peter T. Fox
e,f,g

, Simon B. Eickhoff a,b

Affiliations:
a

Institute of Clinical Neuroscience and Medical Psychology, Medical Faculty,

Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany
b

Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1) Research Centre Jülich, Jülich,

Germany
c

Department of Physics, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA;

d

Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA

e

Research Imaging Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio,

TX, USA
f

Research Service, South Texas Veterans Administration Medical Center, San

Antonio, TX, USA
g

State Key Laboratory for Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Hong Kong,

Hong Kong
* Contributed equally to the manuscript

Correspondence should be addressed to:
Edna C. Cieslik
Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich
D- 52425 Jülich, Germany
Phone: +49 2461 61-4564
Fax:

+49 2461 61-2990

e-mail: e.cieslik@fz-juelich.de

Highlights:
Meta-analyses show differential involvement of frontal cortex for eye movements
Lateral FEF and posterior SEF reveal stronger convergence for prosaccades
Medial FEF and aMCC reveal consistent stronger involvement for antisaccades
Lateral FEF and posterior SEF show specific FC with a motor network
Medial FEF and aMCC show specific FC with a cognitive control network

Abstract
The antisaccade task has been widely used to investigate cognitive action control.
While the general network for saccadic eye movements is well defined, the exact
location of eye fields within the frontal cortex strongly varies between studies. It is
unknown whether this inconsistency reflects spatial uncertainty or is the result of
different involvement of subregions for specific aspects of eye movement control. The
aim of the present study was to examine functional differentiations within the frontal
cortex by integrating results from neuroimaging studies analyzing pro- and
antisaccade behavior using meta-analyses. The results provide evidence for a
differential functional specialization of neighboring oculomotor frontal regions, with
lateral frontal eye fields (FEF) and supplementary eye field (SEF) more often involved
in prosaccades while medial FEF and anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC) revealed
consistent stronger involvement for antisaccades. This dissociation was furthermore
mirrored by functional connectivity analyses showing that the lateral FEF and SEF
are embedded in a motor output network, while medial FEF and aMCC are integrated
in a multiple demand network.

Keywords: eye movements, fMRI, medial FEF, lateral FEF, SEF, aMCC, metaanalysis, functional connectivity (FC), meta-analytic connectivity modeling (MACM),
resting state

1. Introduction
Visual exploration of our environment depends on different kinds of saccadic eye
movements requiring distinct levels of control processes. Visually guided saccades
are reflexive rapid eye movements directed towards a particular stimulus location
while volitional saccades are initiated endogenously and modulated by higher order
control processes (cf. McDowell et al., 2008). A classical paradigm to investigate
different aspects of control demands during oculomotor behavior in a well-controlled
experimental setup is the antisaccade task (Hallett, 1978). In its most common
implementation, the participant is instructed to fixate a central location and is then
presented with a lateralized visual stimulus. In (previously cued) prosaccade trials
participants are required to make a saccade towards the stimulus, while in
antisaccade trials participants are required to perform a saccade to the mirror
symmetrical position. While a prosaccade is a direct sensorimotor transformation, it
has been suggested that correct performance in antisaccade trials requires additional
higher cognitive processes compared to the (more reflexive) prosaccade trials
(Herweg et al., 2014; McDowell et al., 2008; Munoz and Everling, 2004). During
antisaccade trials participants first have to inhibit the reflexive response to look
towards the visual target and then transform the stimulus location into an
endogenous volitional response to the contralateral side (Munoz and Everling, 2004).
Comparing performance in antisaccade trials with those in prosaccade trials usually
reveals increased error rates and an increase in reaction times for antisaccades (for
a review see Everling and Fischer, 1998).
An extensive literature covering electrophysiological and neuroimaging findings has
attempted to delineate the underlying neural substrates of saccadic eye movements
in humans and non-human primates (e.g. Brown et al., 2006; Chikazoe et al., 2007;
Ettinger et al., 2008; Schlag-Rey et al., 1997; Wegener et al., 2008; for a review see

Munoz and Everling, 2004). The fundamental neural circuitry underlying the
transformation of visual input into motor output does not seem to differ substantially
between visually driven prosaccades and more complex saccades, such as
antisaccades (Leigh and Zee, 1999). Visual information enters the brain through the
retina and is sent via the optic tract to the lateral geniculate nucleus and from there to
the primary visual cortex (for a review see McDowell et al., 2008). Then, information
is sent to the extrastriate visual areas and further to the parietal cortex, particularly
the superior parietal lobe and parietal eye fields. From the parietal cortex information
is forwarded to the frontal eye fields (FEF) and supplementary eye field (SEF) to
which it exerts reciprocal connections (Barbas and Mesulam, 1981; Ferraina et al.,
2002; Leichnetz, 2001). These cortical regions have direct connections to the
subcortical saccade circuit such as the thalamus, basal ganglia and superior
colliculus which modulate information via feedback loops (cf. Lynch and Tian, 2006).
When the context requires additional higher cognitive processes, such as when
performing an antisaccade, changed activity levels in the basic saccade circuitry as
well as activity increases in additional brain areas (specifically in the prefrontal cortex
(PFC)) have been observed (cf. McDowell et al., 2008).
Three different eye fields have been identified in the non-human primate frontal lobe:
the SEF and the cingulate eye field (CEF) within the posterior medial frontal cortex
and the FEF lying within the dorsal premotor cortex (for a review see Amiez and
Petrides, 2009). Some authors have argued for further subdivisions within these
frontal oculomotor areas particularly within the FEF, which might reflect differentiable
involvement in sensorimotor versus cognitive control demands during eye movement
behavior (McDowell et al., 2008). This dissociation is well in line with reports of
differential anatomical and functional connectivity of subregions within the FEF
especially with the visual and parietal cortices as revealed by tracer and functional

connectivity analyses in non-human primates (Babapoor-Farrokhran et al., 2013;
Schall et al., 1995; Stanton et al., 1995). While potential homologues of (at least) the
FEF and SEF have been described in the human brain using imaging techniques,
localization varies between different studies making precise anatomical delineations
rather difficult. The image is furthermore complicated by divergences between
functional imaging results and those from electrical stimulation studies in humans (for
a review see Amiez and Petrides, 2009; Sweeney et al., 2007). Possible explanations
for this inconsistency might be spatial uncertainty in neuroimaging methods as well
as differences in the specific paradigm settings and hence variable involvement of
subregions within the dorsal premotor and posterior medial frontal cortex specifically
associated with either more basal sensorimotor processes or higher volitional control
demands.
One possible approach to overcome the potential bias of individual studies and look
for convergent brain activation associated with specific aspects of eye movements is
integrating results from different neuroimaging studies using meta-analyses. We here
used coordinate-based activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analysis (Eickhoff
et al., 2012; Eickhoff et al., 2009; Turkeltaub et al., 2002; Turkeltaub et al., 2012) as
a method to integrate results from different experiments investigating brain activity
changes during the performance of pro- and antisaccades. This method allows
identifying reliable region of interests robustly defined across many experiments that
may in a next step be used as a priori information to investigate the specific network
structure with independent datasets such as functional or structural connectivity data.
In the present study we investigated functional connectivity (FC) using taskdependent and task-independent FC analyses. FC is defined as the temporal
coincidence of neurophysiological events in spatially distant brain areas (cf. Aertsen
et al., 1989; Friston et al., 1993). FC thus represents a general concept of describing

brain connectivity based on correlative observations and may be assessed in
different settings using different methods. The two most popular of those are taskdependent analyses of co-activation patterns and in particular correlations in taskfree resting-state fMRI data. Methods for assessing task-dependent FC have
emerged within the last years through meta-analytic connectivity modeling (MACM)
(Laird et al., 2009; Eickhoff et al, 2010; Robinson et al., 2010), a method capitalizing
on the large number of highly standardized neuroimaging reports as contained, e.g.,
in the BrainMap database (www.brainmap.org).

MACM-FC analyses rely on

identifying those regions that show consistent co-activation with a specific seed
region across a multitude of neuroimaging experiments. Importantly, selection of
experiments used for the specific analysis is solely based on the prerequisite of
finding activation within the particular seed region, independent of the type of
paradigm used. Then, inference is performed based on the likelihood of observing
concurrent activation in any other region in the brain (cf. Jakobs et al., 2012). This
data-driven approach allows to specify networks conjointly co-activating across a
broad range of differing experimental tasks without any selection biases (Eickhoff and
Grefkes, 2011; Cieslik et al., 2013) and hence reflects task-dependent FC.
Task-independent or resting state FC, in turn, is based on the analysis of
synchronized spontaneous signal fluctuation in the absence of an external structured
task (Beckmann et al., 2005; for a review see van den Heuval and Hulshoff Pol
2010). Even though resting-state (RS) connectivity cannot be mapped back to an
actual task, its functional relevance has been supported by findings robustly showing
that most identified resting-state networks resemble known functional networks found
for basic visual processing up to higher cognitive functions, such as attention or
salience detection (for a review see van den Heuvel and Holshoff Pol, 2010 and Lee
et al., 2013). Moreover, a recent study could show that synchronized spontaneous

neural activity across cortical regions is relevant for behavior by showing that RS
correlation between two face-selective regions positively correlated with individual
performance in different face processing tasks but not in non-face tasks (Zhu et al.,
2011). The most common interpretation of RS connectivity is that it may help to keep
systems in an active state, hence improving performance and control processes
whenever functional connectivity is required (cf. van den Heuvel and Holshoff Pol,
2010).
Summarizing, as the functional role of a region is supposed to be crucially related to
the neural network it is interacting with, FC analyses can provide new information
about large-scale communication in the human brain and functional specialization of
brain regions.
The aim of the present study was twofold: we investigated potential subdivisions
within the medial (SEF/CEF) and lateral (FEF) frontal cortex reflecting differentiated
functional involvement in either more basal sensorimotor or higher cognitive control
processes. In a next step, we tested for possible functional connectivity (FC)
differences between such regions supporting different aspects of eye movement
behavior. In particular, we used meta-analyses to test which regions within the frontal
cortex showed consistent involvement during prosaccades across neuroimaging
studies and which regions were consistently stronger recruited for antisaccades vs.
prosaccades. Then, FC differences between regions selectively involved in
prosaccades versus those specifically involved in antisaccades were investigated
using task-dependent and task-independent FC. As prosaccades require a direct
visuomotor transformation that is strongly reflexive (e.g. Munoz and Everling, 2004)
we hypothesized that frontal regions stronger involved in prosaccades would show
specific FC with areas that are known to be associated with more basal motor
processes. On the other hand, regions specifically involved for antisaccades would

be more strongly involved in a network associated with increased demands for
cognitive control as antisaccades requires additional control processes to be able to
suppress the prepotent motor response and endogenously initiate the incongruent
eye movement (McDowell et al., 2008; Munoz and Everling, 2004).

2. Methods
2.1 Meta-analyses
2.1.1 Criteria selection of data used for meta-analysis
The investigations were performed according to the standard procedures for
neuroimaging meta-analyses using ALE (cf. e.g. Langner and Eickhoff, 2013;
Rottschy et al., 2012). In the present meta-analyses, neuroimaging experiments
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and positron emission
tomography (PET) investigating the neural correlates of the pro- and antisaccade
task were included. To be able to investigate consistent differential involvement for
different control demands during saccadic eye movements, we included experiments
either contrasting prosaccades versus rest or a fixation condition as well as
experiments contrasting antisaccades versus prosaccades. Relevant experiments
were identified by a PubMed literature search (http://www.pubmed.org), including the
„related articles‟ function of the PubMed database as well as reference tracing of
retrieved studies and review articles. Only data from healthy adults were included,
while data from children and patients were excluded. Moreover, single-subject
reports as well as experiments investigating between-group effects pertaining, for
example, to handedness, sex, or genotype were excluded. In the present study only
results from whole-brain group analyses reported as coordinates in a standard
reference space (Talairach/Tournoux or MNI) were included, while results of region of
interest analyses were excluded. However, it has to be noted that in some of the
studies included - especially the older ones – the field of view may not always cover
the lowest extent of the brain, such as the lowermost part of the cerebellum. Based
on these criteria, 12 experiments contrasting prosaccades vs. a baseline condition,
which could be either prosaccades vs. rest or prosaccades vs. baseline, were
identified eligible for inclusion into the present meta-analysis (see Table 1).

Moreover, 12 experiments contrasting antisaccades vs. prosaccades were included
to identify those regions that reveal consistent stronger involvement for antisaccades
compared to prosaccades and should therefore reflect the additional cognitive
processes that are required to correctly perform an antisaccade. We did not include
experiments contrasting antisaccades vs. rest or antisaccades vs. baseline as this
contrast would also reveal brain regions that are associated with the basal motor
aspects of eye movements and we here wanted to focus on those regions that are
specifically associated with the cognitive control demands during antisaccades.

Coordinates reported in Talairach space were converted into MNI coordinates using
a linear transformation (Lancaster et al., 2007) to account for differences in
coordinates (MNI vs. Talairach space) between experiments.

- Table 1 about here please -

2.1.2 Activation likelihood estimation algorithm
The meta-analyses were performed using the revised activation likelihood estimation
(ALE) algorithm for coordinate-based meta-analyses of neuroimaging results
(Eickhoff et al., 2012; Turkeltaub et al., 2002) implemented as in-house MATLAB
tools. This algorithm allows identifying those areas that show a convergence of
reported coordinates across experiments, which are higher than expected from a
random spatial association. The key idea behind ALE is to treat the reported foci as
centers for 3D Gaussian probability distributions capturing the spatial uncertainty
associated with each focus. Importantly, the width of these uncertainty functions is

determined based on empirical data on the between-subject and between-template
variance, which represent the main components of this uncertainty. Importantly, the
applied algorithm weights the between-subject variance by the number of examined
subjects per study, accommodating the notion that larger sample sizes should
provide more reliable approximations of the „true‟ activation effect and should
therefore be modeled by „smaller‟ Gaussian distributions (Eickhoff et al., 2009).
The probabilities of all foci reported in a given experiment were then combined for
each voxel, resulting in a modelled activation (MA) map (Turkeltaub et al., 2012).
Taking the union across these MA maps yielded voxel-wise ALE scores describing
the convergence of results at each particular location of the brain. To distinguish
„true‟ convergence between studies from random convergence (i.e., noise), ALE
scores were compared to a null-distribution reflecting a random spatial association
between experiments. Hereby, a random-effects inference is invoked, focusing on
inference on the above-chance convergence between studies, not clustering of foci
within a particular study. The p-value of „true” ALE was then given by the proportion
of equal or higher values obtained under the null-distribution. The resulting nonparametric p-values for each meta-analysis were then thresholded at a cluster-level
corrected threshold of p<0.05 (cluster-forming threshold at voxel-level p<0.001) and
transformed into Z-scores for display.
To test for differences between experimental conditions separate ALE meta-analyses
for each condition were performed and subsequently the voxel-wise difference
between the ensuing ALE maps was computed (cf. Langner and Eickhoff, 2013;
Rottschy et al., 2012). In a next step, all experiments contributing to either analysis
were pooled and randomly divided into two groups being of the same size as the two
original sets under the null-hypothesis of label-exchangeability. Then, ALE scores for
these two randomly assembled groups were substracted from each other voxel-wise.

This procedure was repeated 10,000 times yielding an empirical null distribution of
ALE-score differences between the two conditions. This empirical null-distribution
was used for testing the significance of the observed difference in each voxel´s ALE
scores by thresholding at a posterior probability of P > .95 for a true difference
between the two samples. Voxels surviving that threshold were inclusively masked by
the respective main effect, that is, the significant effect of the ALE analysis for the
minuend. Moreover, a cluster-extend threshold of k≥ 25 voxels was applied (as done
in Langner and Eickhoff, 2013).
For

anatomic

labelling

of

resulting

effects

in

reference

to

probabilistic

cytoarchitectonic maps the SPM Anatomy Toolbox (Eickhoff et al., 2007; Eickhoff et
al., 2005), version 2.0, was used.

2.2 Functional connectivity analyses
2.2.1 Task-dependent functional connectivity: Meta-analytic connectivity
modeling
To identify the co-activation profile of the foci obtained from the meta-analysis that
showed differential stronger convergence for either the pro- or the antisaccade task,
meta-analytic connectivity modeling (MACM) based on the BrainMap database
(www.brainmap.org) was used. Details on the basic concept and methodology can be
found in Eickhofff et al., (2010) as well as Laird et al., (2009) and Robinson et al.,
(2010).
In a first step, all experiments that showed at least one focus of activation in the seed
region were identified. We restricted the search to fMRI and PET experiments
reporting results from healthy adults only and did not consider any experiments
involving pharmacological interventions or reported group comparisons (e.g. male vs.
female; left-handed vs. right-handed participants). Then, a coordinate-based meta-

analysis was performed in order to identify consistent co-activations across
experiments by using the revised Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) algorithm
(Eickhoff et al., 2012).
In a next step, for each voxel, the probabilities of all foci of a given experiment
were aggregated, yielding a modeled activation (MA) map (Turkeltaub et al., 2012).
The union of all MA maps then resulted in voxel-wise ALE scores, which reflect the
convergence of results at each particular location of the brain. The ensuing ALE
maps were then tested for statistical significance as described above for the metaanalyses. To investigate differences in task-based FC between functionally divergent
seeds a similar approach as for the meta-analyses was performed. That is, difference
maps calculating the voxel-wise difference of the Z-scores obtained from the seed
specific MACM maps were calculated. Experiments contributing to either analysis
were then pooled and randomly divided into two groups of the same size as the sets
of contrasted experiments (Eickhoff et al. 2011). Voxelwise ALE scores for these two
randomly assembled groups were subtracted from each other and recorded.
Repeating this process 10,000 times yielded an empirical null distribution of ALEscore differences between the two conditions. Based on this permutation procedure,
the map of true differences was then thresholded at a posterior probability of p>0.95
for a true difference between the two samples. The resulting maps were then masked
with the respective main effect of the minuend connectivity map to avoid obtaining
significant connectivity in voxels of the difference map that do not show significant coactivation on the underlying connectivity map. Furthermore, only regions with at least
25 cohesive voxels were considered in the resulting difference maps.

2.2.2 Task-independent functional connectivity: Resting-State

For the task-independent FC analyses resting state data from the Nathan Kline
Institute „Rockland‟ sample (online available as part of the International Neuroimaging
Datasharing

Initiative

(http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/pro/nki.html))

were

examined. In the present study only healthy subjects between 18 and 85 years were
included resulting in a sample of 132 subjects (mean age: 42.3 ± 18.08 years; 78
male, 54 female). Images were acquired on a Siemens TrioTim 3T scanner using
blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) contrast [gradient-echo EPI pulse sequence,
repetition time (TR)=2.5 s, echo time (TE)=30 ms, flip angle=80°, in-plane
resolution=3.0 x 3.0 mm, 38 axial slices (3.0 mm thickness), covering the entire
brain]. Data was processed using SPM8 (Welcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
London, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/). From the 260 echo-planar
imaging (EPI) images per subject the first four scans were discarded prior to further
analyses, allowing for magnetic field saturation, followed by motion correction using a
two-pass affine registration. Then, the mean EPI image of each subject was spatially
normalized to the MNI152 space using the “unified segmentation” approach
(Ashburner and Friston, 2005) and the ensuing deformations applied to the individual
EPI volumes. Images were smoothed by a 5-mm full width at half maximum
Gaussian kernel. The effect of the following nuisance variables were then removed
from the BOLD signal time series of each voxel: i) the six motion parameters derived
from the image realignment; ii) the first derivatives of these motion parameters; ii)
mean grey matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid signal intensity per time point
as obtained by separately averaging across voxels attributed to the respective tissue
class in the SPM8 segmentation. All nuisance variables entered the model as first
and also as second order terms (cf. Satterthwaite et al., 2013). Finally, data was
band-pass filtered with the cut-off frequencies of 0.01 and 0.08 Hz as meaningful

resting-state correlations will be predominantly found in these frequencies since the
BOLD response acts as a low-pass filter (Biswal et al., 1995; Fox and Raichle, 2007).
Then, linear (Pearson) correlation coefficients were computed between the ensuing
times series of the respective seed regions and those of all other gray matter voxels
of the brain. These voxel-wise correlation coefficients were then transformed into
Fisher´s Z-scores and fed into a second-level analysis of variance (ANOVA) including
an appropriate non-sphericity correction as implemented in SPM8. To investigate
differences in task-independent FC between functionally divergent seeds, we
contrasted FC between seeds by computing linear contrasts within SPM (e.g. FC of
seed A > FC of seed B). In order to only identify regions showing positive FC with the
seed these contrasts were always restricted to regions found in the positive main
effect of the respective seed by applying minimum conjunction analysis (i.e. (FC of
region A > FC of region B) ∩ positive FC of region A).
Results were thresholded at a cluster-level FWE corrected threshold of p<0.05
(cluster-forming threshold at voxel-level p<0.001). Only regions with at least 25
cohesive voxels were considered in the resulting difference maps. Hence, the same
threshold was used for MACM and resting state analyses.

3. Results
3.1 Meta-analytic results
Performing a meta-analysis across the prosaccade task (i.e. experiments contrasting
“prosaccades vs. rest” and “prosaccades vs. fixation”) revealed consistent
involvement of the SEF, the left and right lateral FEF (covering mainly the precentral
gyrus), the bilateral superior parietal lobule (SPL, area 7A) (Scheperjans et al.,
2008a; Scheperjans et al., 2008b) and the right intraparietal sulcus (IPS, hlP3 and

hIP2) (Choi et al., 2006; Scheperjans et al., 2008b). Moreover, subcortically,
consistent involvement of the left thalamus was shown for the prosaccade task (Fig.
1A, Table S1). To identify those regions consistently stronger activated for
antisaccades, a meta-analysis across experiment contrasting antisaccades vs.
prosaccades was performed. This approach revealed consistent involvement of the
bilateral medial FEF (covering mainly superior and middle frontal gyrus), the SEF,
bilateral SPL (area 7A, 7P) (Scheperjans et al., 2008a; Scheperjans et al., 2008b), as
well as the anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC) (Fig.1B, Table S2). Overlaying the
results of the two meta-analyses as depicted in Fig.1C revealed spatial overlap within
bilateral SPL, FEF and the SEF (Fig.1C).
As the number of included experiments per meta-analysis (n=12) was rather small in
the supplementary results we provide a list of the experiments that contributed to the
specific regional effects, showing that the results were very stable and not driven by
only a small portion of experiments. In particular, for the meta-analysis across
prosaccades at least seven experiments (i.e. more than half of all included
experiments) contributed to the effect in each cortical region. Less convergence was
found for the thalamus, where only four experiments were contributing to the effect.
For antisaccades vs. prosaccades there were at least six experiments contributing for
the effect in each region, but for most regions it was even more (eight to ten
experiments).

- Figure 1 about here please –

Furthermore, we directly contrasted the above results, to test for differential
convergence in pro- and antisaccades, respectively. This analysis revealed stronger
convergence of activity for prosaccades in the SEF, the more lateral parts of the FEF

as well as the right SPL (area 7A) and the left thalamus (Fig.1D in red, Table S3). In
contrast, antisaccade-specific consistency of activity was found in more medial parts
of the FEF, the right aMCC and the right precuneus extending into SPL (Fig.1D in
green, Table S4). That is, within the frontal lobes we found a functional differentiation
within the FEF and the posterior medial frontal cortex for pro- and antisaccades.

3.2. Task-dependent and task-independent functional connectivity analyses
Meta-analytic results revealed a spatial dissociation within the frontal cortex. In
particular, within the posterior medial frontal cortex the SEF was more consistently
found for prosaccades while the aMCC revealed consistent stronger involvement for
antisaccades vs. prosaccades. An analog dissociation was found within the lateral
frontal cortex, particularly within the FEF, with lateral FEF more often involved in
prosaccades and medial FEF more often associated with antisaccades vs.
prosaccades. To further examine if the different spatial locations of clusters within the
FEF and posterior medial frontal cortex reflect distinct functional regions that can also
be distinguished in respect to their functional connectivity profile with other regions,
the frontal oculomotor regions resulting from the latter meta-analytic contrast were
used as seed regions for MACM and RS connectivity analysis. The general approach
was identical for MACM and RS analyses. To test for regions showing increased FC
with prosaccade-specific frontal regions, we first performed a contrast between lateral
vs. medial FEF´s FC as well as a contrast between SEF´s vs. aMCC´s FC. Then, a
conjunction analysis across the specific FC profile of the lateral FEF and the SEF
was performed to reveal those regions commonly integrated with prosaccade-specific
frontal regions. An analog approach was performed to test for regions functionally
coupled with antisaccade-specific regions.

3.2.1 Task-dependent functional connectivity
We first performed a contrast between lateral versus medial FEF FC-profile as well
as between SEF versus aMCC, to identify regions that showed stronger MACM-FC
with prosaccade-related regions. In a next step, a minimum conjunction analysis
across these two contrasts was conducted to reveal those regions that show conjoint
stronger task-dependent FC with lateral FEF and SEF. This approach revealed a
network consisting of bilateral precentral gyrus, superior temporal gyrus (STG), Area
44, the SEF extending into the supplementary motor area (SMA), right temporal pole
as well as bilateral putamen, left thalamus and the cerebellum (Fig.2, in red, Table
S5).
The same rational was done for antisaccade-specific regions. First, a contrast
between medial versus lateral FEF and aMCC versus SEF MACM-FC was
performed, with subsequent conjunction analysis across specific lateral FEF and
aMCC MACM-FC. This analysis revealed a network consisting of bilateral medial
frontal gyrus, IPS, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG),
the aMCC, left SPL and right anterior insula (Fig.2, in green, Table S6).

- Figure 2 about here please -

3.2.2 Task-independent functional connectivity
Again, we first performed a contrast between lateral versus medial FEF and SEF
versus aMCC RS-FC maps respectively and then performed a conjunction analysis
across these contrasts to identify regions that showed specific RS-FC with
prosaccade-related regions. This approach revealed a network consisting of bilateral
precentral gyrus, middle (MTG) extending into superior temporal gyrus (STG), SEF
extending into SMA, as well as left IFG (in particular area 44) (Figure 3, in red, Table

S7). In contrast, medial FEF and aMCC showed conjoint specific RS-FC with bilateral
DLPFC, IPL, posterior cingulate cortex, the aMCC and right superior frontal gyrus
(Figure 3, in green, Table S8).

- Figure 3 about here please -

4. Discussion
The aim of the present study was to examine frontal involvement for different
demands of eye movement control during visually guided prosaccades compared to
antisaccades. This was done by integrating results from previous neuroimaging
studies using coordinate-based meta-analyses. Within the frontal cortex specific
consistent involvement of lateral FEF and posterior SEF was found for prosaccades,
while antisaccade performance revealed consistent stronger recruitment of the
medial FEF and aMCC. Follow-up task-dependent and task-independent FC
analyses revealed differential involvement of saccade-specific frontal regions with
motor-related areas as well as subcortical regions. In contrast, antisaccade-specific
regions were functionally embedded in a dorsal fronto-parietal network.
The results hence show that differential association of frontal regions with either more
basal aspects of eye movement control during the performance of prosaccades or
higher cognitive demands during antisaccade performance are corroborated by
specific involvement in differential neural networks.

4.1. Meta-analysis
In a first step we performed a meta-analysis across experiments contrasting
prosaccades vs. baseline or fixation revealing consistent involvement of bilateral
SPL, lateral FEF, SEF, the right IPS and left thalamus (see Fig. 1A). A second metaanalysis

was

performed

across

experiments

contrasting

antisaccades

vs.

prosaccades and showed consistent stronger involvement of bilateral SPL, medial
FEF, SEF and aMCC for antisaccades (Fig.1B). Finally, commonalities as well as
differences between these two experiment classes were delineated by conjunction
and contrast analysis. In the following we will discuss each of the regions contributing

to saccadic eye movements as well as potential spatial differentiation particularly
within the frontal cortex.

Parietal lobe
The dorsal parietal lobe along the IPS, extending dorsomedially into the SPL, as well
as the dorsal frontal cortex along the FEF, has commonly been found to be activated
in tasks involving covert attentional shifts to peripheral targets as well as when
attention and saccades are shifted into the same direction (Dyckman et al., 2007;
McDowell et al., 2005). This finding is well in line with the hypothesis that the neural
correlates of oculomotor and attentional processes overlap and both processes are
highly interrelated (Corbetta, 1998; Corbetta et al., 1998). Spatial and object location
information travels from the visual cortex to the posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
(Baizer et al., 1991) where visual space information is retinotopically mapped
preferentially in the contralateral hemisphere (Sereno et al., 2001). Non-human
primate studies have shown that stimulus location is coded within a specific region of
the PPC, the parietal eye field (PEF), in terms of distance and direction from the
current center of gaze (Colby and Duhamel, 1996) and that this region is connected
to the FEF (Ferraina et al., 2002; Schall, 1997). The human homologue of the parietal
eye field has been proposed to lie within the deep region of the IPS (Muri et al.,
1996). Interestingly, in the present meta-analyses, consistent involvement of the IPS
(particularly area hIP2, hIP3) was only found within the right hemisphere for
prosaccades. In contrast, a more posterior region of the PPC - area 7A within the
SPL - was consistently found across prosaccades, but also for experiments
contrasting antisaccades vs. prosaccades (see Figure 1A-C). That is, while area 7A
seems to be involved whenever participants have to perform an eye movement
towards a visually coded spatial location, it furthermore increases its activity during

the performance of the cognitively more demanding antisaccade. Furthermore, a
spatial dissociation was observed within right SPL, as more lateral parts were more
often involved for prosaccades while medial parts were more consistently involved for
antisaccades vs. prosaccades (Fig.1D).
One possible reason for strong involvement of the SPL for pro- as well as
antisaccades in the present study, while the IPS was only found for prosaccades in
the right hemisphere, might be that the IPS is known to respond preferentially to
visual targets in the contralateral field (Capotosto et al., 2013; Cieslik et al., 2010). As
in fMRI paradigms investigating the antisaccade task, trials are rarely analyzed
separately for left and right-sided eye movements, less consistent involvement of the
IPS might be found. The SPL, in contrast, has been found to play a crucial role in
shifting the locus of spatial attention, such as when a spatial displacement occurs in
the location of a target or the focus of attention independent of its direction
(Capotosto et al., 2013; Molenberghs et al., 2007). This region could therefore be
found more consistently irrespective of analyzing eye movements to opposite
directions separately or together. The present study hence provides evidence for a
strong involvement of area 7A in saccadic eye movements which is most possibly
associated with the shifting of attentional resources towards a particular location that
takes place when performing a prosaccade but even more so when participants have
to endogenously reorient their attention away from the target to the mirrorsymmetrical position.

Frontal eye fields
In humans the FEF are located in the precentral gyrus around the intersection with
the caudalmost part of the superior frontal gyrus (cf. Paus, 1996) with exact location
varying between studies and sometimes also covering the middle frontal gyrus (cf.

Amiez and Petrides, 2009; Blanke et al., 2000). Discrepancies between imaging and
the few electrical stimulation studies that are available in humans further complicate
reliable anatomical delineations of the FEF in humans (cf. Amiez and Petrides, 2009).
Lesion and transcranial stimulation studies revealed a key role for the FEF in the
initiation of internally-triggered intentional or exploratory saccades (Heide and Kompf,
1998; Wipfli et al., 2001). Anatomical and functional connectivity between vestibular
regions and the FEF indicate that these two systems interact during the generation of
smooth pursuit eye movements (Fukushima et al., 2006; zu Eulenburg et al., 2012).
Furthermore, the FEF have not only been related to the generation but also the
preparation of eye movements. For example, Connolly and colleagues (Connolly et
al., 2002) used an antisaccade task with a variable gap period before appearance of
the target stimulus and participants were instructed before the gap period to make
either a pro- or antisaccade. Using this setup the authors found that activation within
the FEF began to increase during the gap period and moreover revealed higher
activity for anti- than prosaccadic trials. Thereby it seems that the FEF are already
involved at an early stage when the intention to perform an eye movement occurs
and not only during the generation process itself.
The present meta-analyses revealed consistent involvement of the frontal eye fields
for prosaccades as well as consistent higher activity for antisaccades compared to
prosaccades. Interestingly, even though there was some overlap between the FEF
clusters revealed from the two meta-analyses, the exact location of the FEF clusters
differed between both meta-analyses. While the FEF foci consistently found for
prosaccades were located on the precentral sulcus, the antisaccade-specific foci lay
more medial covering mainly the superior and middle frontal gyrus (Fig.1). Different
functional properties of medial and lateral eye fields have previously been proposed
based on imaging studies revealing specific involvement of medial vs. lateral FEF

during newly learned saccade sequences compared to familiar ones (Grosbras et al.,
2001), or saccades to unpredictable targets that require increased spatial attention
demands (Simo et al., 2005). Similarly, a combined MEG-/EEG-study showed
increased medial FEF activity for antisaccades compared to prosaccades prior to
saccade generation, while the lateral FEF showed a divergent pattern (McDowell et
al., 2005). Here, activity for antisaccades showed an initial rise but decelerated close
to the antisaccade response while for prosaccades a continuous activity increase up
until response generation was observed. Hence, it may be argued that the lateral part
of the FEF is involved in the actual motor output, while the medial part is more
strongly associated with higher cognitive processes that come into play e.g. when
eye-movements have to be initiated endogenously (Jamadar et al., 2013; McDowell
et al., 2008). Our results are well in line with this hypothesis. Importantly, the contrast
analysis provided statistical evidence for a spatial dissociation within the FEF, with
the lateral parts being consistently involved in prosaccades while the medial FEF
were consistently stronger associated with antisaccade performance (Fig. 1D).
Summarizing, the present meta-analytic approach reveals meta-analytic evidence for
a spatial dissociation within the frontal eye fields. While the lateral aspects are
involved in more basal processes of eye movement preparation the more medial
parts are specifically recruited for higher control of movement preparation that is
necessary when selection of motor behavior has to be chosen based on specific task
instructions. This spatial dissociation may then also explain some of the variance
found for anatomical location of the FEF in different studies, which may in some
cases be explained by different functional demands and hence differential
involvement of subregions of the FEF.

Posterior medial frontal cortex
Within the posterior medial frontal cortex the SEF as well as the aMCC were
identified being associated with different aspects of eye movement control. The SEF
is located at the paracentral sulcus, rostral to the supplementary motor area (SMA)
(Grosbras et al., 1999). Neural stimulation studies in primates as well as lesion and
functional imaging studies in humans indicate a crucial role for the SEF in various
saccadic tasks such as e.g. visually guided saccades (Luna et al., 1998), smooth
pursuit (Missal and Heinen, 2001), monitoring of errors and reward or when there is
conflict between several ongoing, competing saccadic responses (Parton et al.,
2007). The present finding of consistent activity within the SEF for experiments
contrasting prosaccades versus fixation or baseline provides further evidence that the
SEF is involved in visually guided saccades. Moreover, consistent with the view that
the SEF is strongly recruited when conflict between competing oculomotor response
plans arises (cf. Husain et al., 2003; Parton et al., 2007) the same region was also
consistently found for increased control demands during antisaccade performance as
revealed by overlapping the two results (see Fig. 1C). In line with that Miller and
colleagues (Miller et al., 2005) found two regions lying very close to our right medial
FEF and SEF (which they labeled preSMA) to show greater coherence of the
respective fMRI time series during antisaccades vs. prosaccades providing further
evidence that these two regions strongly interact when increased control processes
become necessary for accurate eye movement behavior. Interestingly however, the
present contrast analysis revealed the SEF to be more consistently involved in
prosaccadic eye movements. It has to be noted that stronger consistency for the SEF
for prosaccades is not contradicting the finding that activity within the SEF increases
when the control demands for eye movements increase. With meta-analytic contrasts
we merely test which brain regions are more consistently involved in a specific

process. The present results let us infer that the SEF is already strongly involved in
the more reflexive processes of eye movements during prosaccades and would
thereby reflect a ubiquitous component in the saccadic motor circuit that is involved
whenever an eye movement has to be made. Additional increases of activity during
more complex eye movements, such as antisaccades, may then be observed
depending on the level of difficulty increases.
Within the posterior medial frontal cortex another region showed differential
involvement for antisaccades compared to prosaccades. Consistent increased
activity for antisaccades was observed in the aMCC, which has previously often been
labeled dorsal anterior cingulate cortex based on Brodmann´s coarser labelling
despite evidence of a structurally and functionally distinct middle cingulate cortex (cf.
Palomero-Gallagher et al., 2009; Vogt, 2004, 2005). Interestingly, this region did not
overlap with the cingulate eye field that has been proposed to be located more
posteriorly (Amiez and Petrides, 2009). Previous lesion and imaging studies revealed
evidence for a crucial role of the aMCC specifically in higher complex saccades, such
as memory guided saccades or antisaccades (Brown et al., 2006; Gaymard et al.,
1998; Matsuda et al., 2004). Moreover, the aMCC has been found to increase its
activity in error antisaccade trials compared to correct antisaccade trials (Ford et al.,
2005), specifically later in the trial (Polli et al., 2005). These results are well in line
with the hypothesis of a specific role of the aMCC for error detection and conflict
monitoring (for a review see Botvinick et al., 2004). More generally, the anterior
portion of the midcingulate cortex has been consistently found in various tasks that
require suppression of a routine action in favour of another task-dependent one
(Cieslik et al., 2015). The role of the aMCC might then correspond to what Stuss and
collegues (Stuss et al., 1995) conceptualized as “energization of the appropriate task
schemata” and what would come into play whenever a non-dominant task schemata

would need to be “energized” or activated (cf. Cieslik et al., 2015). This process
would also come into play when generating the non-dominant antisaccade in the
contralateral direction of the stimulus. Following this interpretation, the region within
the aMCC found to be consistently stronger activated during the performance of
antisaccades compared to prosaccades in the present study may not be selectively
involved in eye movement control, but more generally in the activation of the
appropriate task schema necessary to perform the required action.

Subcortical areas
The only subcortical region that was found to be consistently involved in the
generation of eye movements in the present meta-analyses was the thalamus,
showing consistent involvement for prosaccade generation (Fig.1). Cells within the
thalamus form a link between subcortical areas and the cortex. Within the corticobasal ganglia oculomotor network it is generally believed that the signals that reach
the basal ganglia from the cortical eye fields are sent back to the cortex via the
oculomotor thalamus (for a review see Isoda and Hikosaka, 2011 as well as Tanaka
and Kunimatsu, 2011). While the thalamus has been found during the performance of
visually guided saccades in human and non-human primates (e.g. Aichert et al.,
2012; Baker et al., 2006), some other authors have related the thalamus mainly to
self-initiated and voluntarily triggered saccades (Grosbras et al., 2005; Tanaka,
2007). We did not find evidence for consistent stronger thalamic involvement for
antisaccades versus prosaccades in the present meta-analysis, which is in line with a
previous meta-analysis from Jamadar and colleagues (2013). We therefore would
suggest, that the thalamic involvement during eye movement performance is mainly
related to the motor processes that are triggered whenever an eye movement is

initiated and that would come into play to some extent whenever an oculomotor
movement is initiated, no matter if it is visually driven or internally initiated.
No other subcortical region of the cortico-basal ganglia network was found in the
present meta-analysis even though relatively precise models of basal ganglia
involvement in saccadic eye movements have been established. Within the basal
ganglia circuit the caudate nucleus receives input from the frontal cortex and projects
either directly on the substantia nigra (SN) or through an indirect pathway - via the
globus pallidus and subthalamic nucleus - on the SN. From the SN information is
transmitted back to the cortex via the thalamus or forwarded to brain stem structures
such as the superior colliculus (Hikosaka et al., 2000; Smith et al., 1998). The lack of
basal ganglia involvement in the present study might most possibly be due to
methodological reasons of imaging techniques. In particular, deep brain areas are
difficult to investigate with standard fMRI protocols due to their small size and close
proximity to vascular structures which may be causing physiological noise in the brain
stem or midbrain (Guimaraes et al., 1998) and hence making it difficult to reliably
measure hemodynamic responses in these areas.

Summarizing, the present meta-analytic results revealed consistent involvement of a
frontoparietal network known to be involved in oculomotor control (e.g. Jamadar et
al., 2013; McDowell et al., 2008; Munoz and Everling, 2004). Consistent increased
activity during antisaccade performance was mainly identified in those cortical
regions that were also recruited during prosaccades as revealed by overlaying the
results of both meta-analyses. Furthermore, consistent with our hypothesis, a spatial
dissociation was found particularly within the premotor and the posterior medial
frontal cortex for different aspects of saccadic eye movement control (Fig. 1D). While
the medial FEF and aMCC showed antisaccade-specific involvement, lateral FEF

and SEF were stronger related to visually guided prosaccades. We would
hypothesize that if these results reflect differential involvement in the control of eye
movements these regions should also be integrated in distinct neural networks. To
investigate potential involvement in differential neural networks FC analyses were
performed using task-dependent and task-independent FC which will be discussed in
the following paragraphs.

4.2 Functional connectivity analyses
As outlined in the introduction, task-dependent FC enables us to derive
hypotheses about regions that form functional networks based on their common coactivation profile across different tasks (cf. Cieslik et al., 2013). Task-independent FC
in contrast allows inferences about co-activation of spontaneous BOLD signal time
series in individuals, in the absence of an externally structured task (for a review see
van den Heuvel and Hulshoff Pol, 2010). In the present study we used taskdependent FC based on MACM to delineate differences in the functional connectivity
pattern between the lateral and medial FEF as well as between the SEF and aMCC.
Task-independent FC was then used as a second approach to confirm the
differences found in task-based connectivity.

4.2.1 Task-dependent and task-independent FC
Performing a conjunction analysis across the FC maps for the prosaccade-related
seeds revealed specific task-dependent FC of lateral FEF and SEF with the
precentral gyrus and SEF/SMA surrounding the original seed regions (Fig.2). Beside
areas within and closely surrounding the original seed regions, specific taskdependent FC was found with bilateral area 44 and STG as well as bilateral
putamen, left thalamus and the cerebellum. A very similar cortical pattern was found

using RS analyses, which revealed specific task-independent FC with bilateral
precentral gyrus and SEF/SMA as well as the middle extending into superior
temporal gyrus and left area 44. However, no specific RS-FC with subcortical areas
was found.
Importantly, we only report specific FC; that is, FC with regions that were stronger for
lateral FEF vs. medial FEF and also for SEF vs. aMCC. It can hence be concluded
that lateral FEF and SEF show stronger FC with each other compared to the medial
FEF and aMCC. Interestingly, while the SEF is anatomically connected not only to
the lateral but also the medial FEF (Schall et al., 1993) it seems that functionally the
SEF is stronger linked to the lateral FEF.
Further frontal cortex involvement was found in the IFG, particularly area 44. While
this region has not commonly been associated with eye movements in the past, a
recent parcellation study of Clos and colleagues (2013) functionally characterized
subregions within left area 44 based on BrainMap meta-data and showed that the
posterior portion of area 44 is more strongly related to action processes, such as
action execution as well as action imagination. Clos and colleagues furthermore
showed that all identified subregions within area 44 are functionally connected to the
IFG and adjacent precentral gyrus, the SMA as well as the thalamus and putamen
subcortically, providing further evidence that this region is functionally embedded in a
motor network.
Besides the frontal cortex, specific FC with other cortical regions was only found with
the bilateral posterior STG extending into the MTG. This region is known to respond
to biologically valid information, specifically to eye movements of another person
(Pelphrey et al., 2005; Puce et al., 1998). In line with that, the STG and adjacent STS
have been found to increase their activity during joint attention, in particular when a
person is following someone else´s gaze, i.e. is responding to joint attention (Redcay

et al., 2012). The STG may therefore play a role in the integration of biologically valid
direction information into eye movement motor plans.
Subcortical involvement was revealed by the task-based FC analysis that showed
specific MACM-FC of lateral FEF and SEF with bilateral putamen and left thalamus. It
has long been proposed that within the basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuit the
putamen receives input from cortical areas such as motor and somatosensory
cortices and itself projects on the pallidum. This area, in turn, innervates the
thalamus, which projects back to a specific cortical area (cf. Alexander et al., 1986;
DeLong and Wichmann, 2007). Data from non-human primates have shown that the
thalamus is reciprocally connected with the FEF and SEF (for a review see Tanaka
and Kunimatsu, 2011). In the present study we could identify the mediodorsal
thalamic part which showed specific MACM-FC with the SEF and lateral FEF as thalprefrontal, i.e. a region that is anatomically connected with the prefrontal cortex as
revealed by diffusion data in humans (Behrens et al., 2003). The same region in the
left hemisphere was found to be consistently activated for prosaccades in the present
meta-analysis, a region that we would suggest to be involved in the basal aspects of
eye movement initiation, no matter if it is a visually guided or endogenous initiated
saccade.
Even though lesion and ataxia studies indicate a crucial role of the cerebellum for
both accurate and adaptive smooth pursuit eye movements and horizontal as well as
vertical saccades (Moschner et al., 1999; for a review see Robinson and Fuchs, 2001
and Voogd et al., 2012) neuroimaging studies have found less consistent
involvement of the cerebellum in pro- and antisaccade behavior, which was also
reflected in our meta-analyses. Potential reasons for this might be the lack of
complete cerebellar coverage particularly in older imaging studies. However, in the
task-based FC analyses specific MACM-FC was observed particularly with lobule VI

of the cerebellum. A tracer study in non-human primates showed that this part of the
cerebellum is reciprocally connected with M1 (Kelly and Strick, 2003). Furthermore, a
recent RS-FC analysis in humans that aimed to investigate cerebellar contributions to
several previously identified networks found this region to participate in the
sensorimotor network including amongst others the sensorimotor cortex, premotor
cortex, SMA, aMCC but also subcortical regions such as the thalamus and putamen
(Habas et al., 2009). We would hence suggest that lobule VI of the cerebellum that
showed specific MACM-FC with the lateral FEF and SEF in the present study reveals
an adaptive control function to afford saccade mechanisms with adaptability through
interaction with motor related cortical regions as well as subcortically the thalamus
and putamen.
Summarizing, investigation of lateral FEF‟ and SEF‟s functional connectivity profile
revealed that these regions are commonly integrated in a network related to motor
output control including the basal ganglia-thalamocortical motor circuit as well as the
more motor related part of area 44, the STG and cerebellum.

In contrast, the medial FEF and aMCC were integrated in a (dorsal) fronto-parietal
network. In particular, they showed conjoint MACM-FC with a bilateral network
consisting of the middle frontal gyrus and posterior medial frontal cortex surrounding
the original seed region, the DLPFC, IFG, IPS, the left SPL, right angular gyrus and
right anterior insula (Fig.2). The RS analyses revealed a slightly different connectivity
profile, particularly with bilateral DLPFC, IPL, PCC, the aMCC and right superior
frontal gyrus (Fig.3). A very similar set of fronto-parietal regions, including premotor
regions of the precentral gyrus, posterior parts of the IFG and adjacent insula, the
middle frontal gyrus, the posterior medial frontal cortex as well as parietal regions
including the IPS and adjacent IPC, has been proposed to respond in a domain- and

process-general fashion to a wide variety of cognitive demanding tasks and has
hence been called the multiple demand network (for a review see Duncan, 2010;
Federenko et al., 2013). In line with that these regions have been implicated in a
variety of tasks not only involving cognitive action control (Cieslik et al., 2015), but
also working memory (Rottschy et al., 2012) or vigilant attention (Langner and
Eickhoff, 2013). Moreover, signal fluctuations in these regions strongly correlate with
each other during specific task demands but also during rest conditions when
participants are lying in the scanner without a specific task to perform (Blank et al.,
2014). Most of these regions, specifically in the PFC, have also been found to be
important for the increased cognitive control demands during antisaccade
performance. Even though we could not find consistent stronger activation for
antisaccades versus prosaccades within the PFC in our meta-analysis, a crucial role
of the lateral PFC in antisaccade performance has been revealed by lesion (PierrotDeseilligny et al., 2003) as well as neuroimaging studies (Chikazoe et al., 2007;
Ettinger et al., 2008; Ford et al., 2005) particularly in the late preparation period.
While the involvement of the lateral PFC in tasks such as the antisaccade as well as
the go/no-go or stop signal task has usually been associated with specific inhibitory
processes, recent evidence suggests that this region might be more strongly related
to the maintenance and implementation of the adequate task set including the
activation of the appropriate behavioral alternative (Everling and Johnston, 2013;
Munakata et al., 2011).
While both, task-dependent and task-independent, FC analyses revealed specific
involvement with the lateral PFC, FC connectivity with the parietal cortex differed
between both methods. In particular, while MACM-FC revealed FC with IPS and SPL,
that is regions that were also found in the meta-analytic approach and play a crucial
role in attentional orienting, RS-FC was found with the IPC. Moreover, specific FC

with the PCC was found in the RS analysis that was not present in the MACM
analysis. These differences may most possibly be related to methodological reasons.
As the multiple demand network has been initially characterized based on task-fMRI
data (Duncan, 2010; Duncan and Owen, 2000) that all used a structured task,
differences to RS-FC are actually not surprising but may be explained by the lack of
specific task instructions that most commonly require participants to process a visual
or another sensory input and process it in a task-specific manner. In contrast, in RS
sessions participants are laying in the scanner without performing a structured task,
hence attentional resources will be directed more internally and thoughts being more
self-referential concerning e.g. autobiographic contents (Mazoyer et al., 2001). In line
with that, besides its crucial role in attentional capturing and reorienting to salient and
behaviorally relevant stimuli the IPC – and particularly the supramarginal gyrus - has
been associated with episodic memory retrieval (for a review see Hutchinson et al.,
2009; Skinner and Fernandes, 2007). Furthermore, the dorsal aspect of the PCC that
was also found in the RS analysis has been shown to feature FC with regions
strongly related to cognitive control such as the dorsal attention network, the frontoparietal control network, the salience network but also the default mode network
(Leech et al., 2011; for a review see Leech and Sharp, 2014). It has hence been
proposed to modulate the interaction between cognitive control and default mode
networks, thereby playing a key role in mediating the attentional focus between
internal representations and external changes in the environment, which might play a
constant role when participants are lying in the scanner without a specific task to
perform (cf. Leech et al., 2011).
Summarizing, the medial FEF and aMCC that were found to be more consistently
associated with increased demands for antisaccades versus prosaccades seem to be
integrated in a network that is associated with a diversity of cognitive control

processes. Higher cognitive control specifically necessary when a participant has to
respond to a visual stimulus in an incongruent manner could then be facilitated
through interactions of medial FEF and aMCC with other top-down regions,
specifically those regions that play a dominant role in the multiple demand network.

4.3 Integrating meta-analytic and FC results
Bringing together the connectivity results with those from the meta-analyses, the
hypothesis of a functional dissociation within the FEF and posterior medial frontal
cortex as suggested by the meta-analytic findings is corroborated by the FC analyses
that showed divergent functional profiles of the respective subregions. That is,
different spatial locations within the posterior medial frontal cortex and FEF cannot be
explained simply by spatial uncertainty, but rather reflect different functional modules
that are integrated in distinct neural networks. In particular, involvement of lateral
FEF and SEF for the more basal aspects of eye movements thereby goes along with
FC with a motor output network, while involvement of medial FEF and aMCC for
increased control demands during antisaccade performance is associated with FC
with the multiple demand network. Interestingly, FC was not only observed with those
regions found in the respective meta-analysis but revealed a much broader network
of cortical and subcortical regions. Most of these regions are part of the saccade
network as supported by non-human primate and human studies (for a review see
Munoz and Everling, 2004). Different factors might explain why not all of these
regions were found in the meta-analytic results. First, as already noted some regions
such as subcortical regions or the cerebellum may be difficult to investigate reliably
with fMRI due to technical reasons (Guimaraes et al., 1998; McDowell et al., 2008)
and may only be found when authors specifically focus on that area and adapt the
imaging protocol accordingly. Moreover, specific regional involvement may depend

on what kind of information has to be integrated to drive an eye movement towards
the respective direction; e.g. the STG might be selectively involved when biologically
valid stimuli such as eye movements are presented but not commonly in every
antisaccade task. Moreover, it has to be kept in mind that the original set of
experiments included in each meta-analysis was rather small (n=12) compared to
other large-scale meta-analyses that investigate widely-used fMRI paradigms, such
as working memory experiments. Therefore, regions that show higher spatial
variability across studies such as the DLPFC may be found less consistently using
meta-analyses across a relatively small number of studies.
Summarizing, the present study revealed a spatial dissociation within the frontal
oculomotor regions. While volitional saccade paradigms have provided evidence for
two different foci of activity within the FEF (Dyckman et al., 2007; Jamadar et al.,
2013; McDowell et al., 2008) a spatial dissociation has rarely been tested directly.
Furthermore, to our knowledge this is the first study that could show using multimodal
FC analyses that this spatial dissociation is driven by different neural network
involvement. An analog spatial dissociation was present within the anterior-posterior
axis of the posterior medial frontal cortex.
Relating our results to the well characterized saccade network let us assume that
input of frontal oculomotor areas to the subcortical motor system and cerebellum
might be mainly implemented through the lateral FEF and SEF. In contrast, the
medial FEF and aMCC specifically communicate with regions of the multiple demand
network and together might implement higher cognitive control processes necessary
in the antisaccade task. It has to be kept in mind that the present meta-analytic and
FC approaches do not allow to make any inference about the directionality between
the respective regions, which has however rarely been investigated in the literature.
One previous study has investigated effective connectivity within the saccade

network and found top-down connections from cortical regions, such as the IPS, FEF,
SEF and anterior insula to the thalamus and putamen during pro- and antisaccades
(Hwang et al., 2010). Moreover, during antisaccades the medial frontal gyrus and IFG
were additionally integrated in the network and revealed top-down influences on the
cortical eye fields as well as subcortical areas. This is in line with the hypothesis that
additional PFC areas come into play when complexity of saccadic movements
increase (Everling and Fischer, 1998; Munoz and Everling, 2004; Sweeney et al.,
2007). To better understand the complexity of interregional communication during
saccadic eye movements, future studies should try to further disentangle the flow of
information between regions using e.g. effective connectivity.
In conclusion, it seems that spatially neighboring regions within the frontal lobe may
represent transition zones where different functional roles are driven by distinct
involvement in neural networks. Within the saccade network the FEF and the
posterior medial frontal cortex may hence represent an interface between motor
output and cognitive control and mediate between the different control demands
necessary for accurate eye movements.

4.4 Limitations and future directions
As already mentioned earlier it has to be noted that in comparison to other largescale meta-analyses that focus on more widely used neuroimaging paradigms such
as working memory or face processing, in the present study only a limited number of
experiments (n=12) met the inclusion criteria for each meta-analysis. This drawback
might influence how representative the resulting seed regions are which were then
used for further connectivity analyses. Moreover, this point may particularly have an
impact on regions that are known to show higher spatial variability across studies
such as the DLPFC or IFC. These regions may therefore be found less consistently

using meta-analyses across a relatively small number of studies. At the same time,
the contributions reported in the supplementary results revealed that the regional
effects that could be identified in the present meta-analyses were very stable. In
particular, for each meta-analysis at least half of the experiments (but mostly even
eight to ten experiments) contributed to the effect in each cortical region. Less
convergence was found only for the thalamus. Thus, we could show that even though
the total number of included experiments was rather small, results were not driven by
only a small portion of the studies included.
Another limitation is that we here only included prosaccades and antisaccades but no
other eye movements such as e.g. smooth pursuit or memory-guided saccades.
Therefore, our results of a functional dissociation within the FEF and the posterior
medial frontal cortex for either more basal motor processes versus higher cognitive
control processes are dependent on the type of eye movement included. As studies
in macaque monkeys have revealed evidence for a specific involvement of the caudal
parts of the FEF for smooth pursuit eye movements (Fukushima et al., 2011;
Fukushima et al., 2013), the question arises if the FEF may be subdivided into even
more finely graduated submodules than previously thought and if there might also be
a rostro-caudal functional gradient within the FEF. Future imaging studies could
hence try to disentangle further potential subdivisions within the FEF by comparing
the neural correlates of saccades, antisaccades, memory-guided saccades as well as
smooth

pursuit

eye

movements

within

the

same

participants.

Conclusion
In the present study functional differentiations within the frontal cortex for eye
movement control were investigated by integrating results from neuroimaging studies
analyzing pro- and antisaccade performance in healthy participants. We found that
the lateral FEF and the SEF were more often involved in prosaccade performance
whereas the medial FEF and the aMCC showed consistent increased involvement for
antisaccades vs. prosaccades. This functional dissociation was furthermore mirrored
by a differential involvement in neural networks as revealed by subsequent MACMand RS-FC analyses. While the frontal regions stronger recruited for prosaccades
were embedded in a motor output network, the frontal regions associated with higher
control mechanisms for eye movements showed stronger FC with a multiple demand
network that comes into play whenever task difficulty increases.
The present results reveal quantitative functional as well as multimodal network
evidence that specific regions within the frontal cortex are differentially embedded in
the saccade network. In particular, we would propose a functional gradient within the
FEF and posterior medial frontal cortex with medial parts of the FEF and anterior
parts of the posterior medial frontal cortex being strongly involved in higher cognitive
control mechanisms necessary in the antisaccade task while lateral parts of the FEF
and the posterior medial frontal cortex are associated with the motor output.

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, EI 816/41, LA 3071/3, EI816/6-1), the National Institute of Mental Health (R01-MH074457)
and the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under
grant agreement no. 604102 (Human Brain Project).

References
Aertsen, A.M., Gerstein, G.L., Habib, M.K., Palm, G., 1989. Dynamics of neuronal firing
correlation: modulation of "effective connectivity". Journal of neurophysiology 61, 900-917.

Aichert, D.S., Williams, S.C., Moller, H.J., Kumari, V., Ettinger, U., 2012. Functional
neural correlates of psychometric schizotypy: an fMRI study of antisaccades.
Psychophysiology 49, 345-356.
Alexander, G.E., DeLong, M.R., Strick, P.L., 1986. Parallel organization of
functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annual review of
neuroscience 9, 357-381.
Amiez, C., Petrides, M., 2009. Anatomical organization of the eye fields in the human
and non-human primate frontal cortex. Progress in neurobiology 89, 220-230.
Ashburner, J., Friston, K.J., 2005. Unified segmentation. Neuroimage 26, 839-851.
Babapoor-Farrokhran, S., Hutchison, R.M., Gati, J.S., Menon, R.S., Everling, S.,
2013. Functional connectivity patterns of medial and lateral macaque frontal eye
fields reveal distinct visuomotor networks. Journal of neurophysiology 109, 25602570.
Baizer, J.S., Ungerleider, L.G., Desimone, R., 1991. Organization of visual inputs to
the inferior temporal and posterior parietal cortex in macaques. J Neurosci 11, 168190.

Baker, J.T., Patel, G.H., Corbetta, M., Snyder, L.H., 2006. Distribution of activity
across the monkey cerebral cortical surface, thalamus and midbrain during rapid,
visually guided saccades. Cereb Cortex 16, 447-459.
Barbas, H., Mesulam, M.M., 1981. Organization of afferent input to subdivisions of
area 8 in the rhesus monkey. The Journal of comparative neurology 200, 407-431.
Beckmann, C.F., DeLuca, M., Devlin, J.T., Smith, S.M., 2005. Investigations into restingstate connectivity using independent component analysis. Philosophical transactions of the
Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 360, 1001-1013.

Behrens, T.E., Johansen-Berg, H., Woolrich, M.W., Smith, S.M., Wheeler-Kingshott,
C.A., Boulby, P.A., Barker, G.J., Sillery, E.L., Sheehan, K., Ciccarelli, O., Thompson,
A.J., Brady, J.M., Matthews, P.M., 2003. Non-invasive mapping of connections
between human thalamus and cortex using diffusion imaging. Nature neuroscience 6,
750-757.
Biswal, B., Yetkin, F.Z., Haughton, V.M., Hyde, J.S., 1995. Functional connectivity in
the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magnetic resonance
in medicine 34, 537-541.
Blank, I., Kanwisher, N., Fedorenko, E., 2014. A functional dissociation between
language and multiple-demand systems revealed in patterns of BOLD signal
fluctuations. Journal of neurophysiology 112, 1105-1118.
Blanke, O., Spinelli, L., Thut, G., Michel, C.M., Perrig, S., Landis, T., Seeck, M.,
2000. Location of the human frontal eye field as defined by electrical cortical
stimulation:

anatomical,

functional

and

electrophysiological

characteristics.

Neuroreport 11, 1907-1913.
Botvinick, M.M., Cohen, J.D., Carter, C.S., 2004. Conflict monitoring and anterior
cingulate cortex: an update. Trends in cognitive sciences 8, 539-546.

Brown, M.R., Goltz, H.C., Vilis, T., Ford, K.A., Everling, S., 2006. Inhibition and
generation of saccades: rapid event-related fMRI of prosaccades, antisaccades, and
nogo trials. Neuroimage 33, 644-659.
Capotosto, P., Tosoni, A., Spadone, S., Sestieri, C., Perrucci, M.G., Romani, G.L.,
Della Penna, S., Corbetta, M., 2013. Anatomical segregation of visual selection
mechanisms in human parietal cortex. J Neurosci 33, 6225-6229.
Chikazoe, J., Konishi, S., Asari, T., Jimura, K., Miyashita, Y., 2007. Activation of right
inferior frontal gyrus during response inhibition across response modalities. Journal
of cognitive neuroscience 19, 69-80.
Choi, H.J., Zilles, K., Mohlberg, H., Schleicher, A., Fink, G.R., Armstrong, E., Amunts,
K., 2006. Cytoarchitectonic identification and probabilistic mapping of two distinct
areas within the anterior ventral bank of the human intraparietal sulcus. The Journal
of comparative neurology 495, 53-69.
Cieslik, E.C., Mueller, V.I., Eickhoff, C.R., Langner, R., Eickhoff, S.B., 2015. Three
key regions for supervisory attentional control: evidence from neuroimaging metaanalyses. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 48, 22-34.
Cieslik, E.C., Zilles, K., Caspers, S., Roski, C., Kellermann, T.S., Jakobs, O., Langner, R.,
Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., Eickhoff, S.B., 2013. Is there "one" DLPFC in cognitive action control?
Evidence for heterogeneity from co-activation-based parcellation. Cereb Cortex 23, 26772689.

Cieslik, E.C., Zilles, K., Kurth, F., Eickhoff, S.B., 2010. Dissociating bottom-up and
top-down processes in a manual stimulus-response compatibility task. Journal of
neurophysiology 104, 1472-1483.
Clos, M., Amunts, K., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., Eickhoff, S.B., 2013. Tackling the
multifunctional nature of Broca's region meta-analytically: Co-activation-based
parcellation of area 44. Neuroimage 83C, 174-188.

Colby, C.L., Duhamel, J.R., 1996. Spatial representations for action in parietal cortex.
Brain research. Cognitive brain research 5, 105-115.
Connolly, J.D., Goodale, M.A., Menon, R.S., Munoz, D.P., 2002. Human fMRI
evidence for the neural correlates of preparatory set. Nature neuroscience 5, 13451352.
Corbetta, M., 1998. Frontoparietal cortical networks for directing attention and the
eye to visual locations: identical, independent, or overlapping neural systems? Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 95, 831-838.
Corbetta, M., Akbudak, E., Conturo, T.E., Snyder, A.Z., Ollinger, J.M., Drury, H.A.,
Linenweber, M.R., Petersen, S.E., Raichle, M.E., Van Essen, D.C., Shulman, G.L.,
1998. A common network of functional areas for attention and eye movements.
Neuron 21, 761-773.
DeLong, M.R., Wichmann, T., 2007. Circuits and circuit disorders of the basal
ganglia. Archives of neurology 64, 20-24.
Duncan, J., 2010. The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: mental
programs for intelligent behaviour. Trends in cognitive sciences 14, 172-179.
Duncan, J., Owen, A.M., 2000. Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruited
by diverse cognitive demands. Trends in neurosciences 23, 475-483.
Dyckman, K.A., Camchong, J., Clementz, B.A., McDowell, J.E., 2007. An effect of
context on saccade-related behavior and brain activity. Neuroimage 36, 774-784.
Eickhoff, S.B., Bzdok, D., Laird, A.R., Kurth, F., Fox, P.T., 2012. Activation likelihood
estimation meta-analysis revisited. Neuroimage 59, 2349-2361.
Eickhoff, S.B., Grefkes, C., 2011. Approaches for the integrated analysis of structure,
function and connectivity of the human brain. Clinical EEG and neuroscience 42, 107-121.

Eickhoff, S.B., Jbabdi, S., Caspers, S., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., Zilles, K., Behrens,
T.E., 2010. Anatomical and functional connectivity of cytoarchitectonic areas within
the human parietal operculum. J Neurosci 30, 6409-6421.
Eickhoff, S.B., Laird, A.R., Grefkes, C., Wang, L.E., Zilles, K., Fox, P.T., 2009.
Coordinate-based activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of neuroimaging
data: a random-effects approach based on empirical estimates of spatial uncertainty.
Hum Brain Mapp 30, 2907-2926.
Eickhoff, S.B., Paus, T., Caspers, S., Grosbras, M.H., Evans, A.C., Zilles, K.,
Amunts,

K.,

2007.

Assignment

of

functional

activations

to

probabilistic

cytoarchitectonic areas revisited. Neuroimage 36, 511-521.
Eickhoff, S.B., Stephan, K.E., Mohlberg, H., Grefkes, C., Fink, G.R., Amunts, K.,
Zilles, K., 2005. A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic
maps and functional imaging data. Neuroimage 25, 1325-1335.
Ettinger, U., Ffytche, D.H., Kumari, V., Kathmann, N., Reuter, B., Zelaya, F.,
Williams, S.C., 2008. Decomposing the neural correlates of antisaccade eye
movements using event-related FMRI. Cereb Cortex 18, 1148-1159.
Everling, S., Fischer, B., 1998. The antisaccade: a review of basic research and
clinical studies. Neuropsychologia 36, 885-899.
Everling, S., Johnston, K., 2013. Control of the superior colliculus by the lateral
prefrontal cortex. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
B, Biological sciences 368, 20130068.
Fedorenko, E., Duncan, J., Kanwisher, N., 2013. Broad domain generality in focal
regions of frontal and parietal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 16616-16621.
Ferraina, S., Pare, M., Wurtz, R.H., 2002. Comparison of cortico-cortical and corticocollicular signals for the generation of saccadic eye movements. Journal of
neurophysiology 87, 845-858.

Ford, K.A., Goltz, H.C., Brown, M.R., Everling, S., 2005. Neural processes
associated with antisaccade task performance investigated with event-related FMRI.
Journal of neurophysiology 94, 429-440.
Fox, M.D., Raichle, M.E., 2007. Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed
with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 8, 700-711.
Friston, K.J., Frith, C.D., Liddle, P.F., Frackowiak, R.S., 1993. Functional connectivity: the
principal-component analysis of large (PET) data sets. Journal of cerebral blood flow and
metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 13, 5-14.

Fukushima, J., Akao, T., Kurkin, S., Kaneko, C.R., Fukushima, K., 2006. The
vestibular-related frontal cortex and its role in smooth-pursuit eye movements and
vestibular-pursuit interactions. Journal of vestibular research : equilibrium &
orientation 16, 1-22.
Fukushima, J., Akao, T., Shichinohe, N., Kurkin, S., Kaneko, C.R., Fukushima, K.,
2011. Neuronal activity in the caudal frontal eye fields of monkeys during memorybased smooth pursuit eye movements: comparison with the supplementary eye
fields. Cereb Cortex 21, 1910-1924.
Fukushima, K., Fukushima, J., Warabi, T., Barnes, G.R., 2013. Cognitive processes
involved in smooth pursuit eye movements: behavioral evidence, neural substrate
and clinical correlation. Frontiers in systems neuroscience 7, 4.
Gaymard, B., Rivaud, S., Cassarini, J.F., Dubard, T., Rancurel, G., Agid, Y., PierrotDeseilligny, C., 1998. Effects of anterior cingulate cortex lesions on ocular saccades
in humans. Experimental brain research 120, 173-183.
Grosbras, M.H., Laird, A.R., Paus, T., 2005. Cortical regions involved in eye
movements, shifts of attention, and gaze perception. Hum Brain Mapp 25, 140-154.

Grosbras, M.H., Leonards, U., Lobel, E., Poline, J.B., LeBihan, D., Berthoz, A., 2001.
Human cortical networks for new and familiar sequences of saccades. Cereb Cortex
11, 936-945.
Grosbras, M.H., Lobel, E., Van de Moortele, P.F., LeBihan, D., Berthoz, A., 1999. An
anatomical landmark for the supplementary eye fields in human revealed with
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Cereb Cortex 9, 705-711.
Guimaraes, A.R., Melcher, J.R., Talavage, T.M., Baker, J.R., Ledden, P., Rosen,
B.R., Kiang, N.Y., Fullerton, B.C., Weisskoff, R.M., 1998. Imaging subcortical
auditory activity in humans. Hum Brain Mapp 6, 33-41.
Habas, C., Kamdar, N., Nguyen, D., Prater, K., Beckmann, C.F., Menon, V., Greicius,
M.D., 2009. Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks. J
Neurosci 29, 8586-8594.
Hallett, P.E., 1978. Primary and secondary saccades to goals defined by instructions.
Vision research 18, 1279-1296.
Heide, W., Kompf, D., 1998. Combined deficits of saccades and visuo-spatial
orientation after cortical lesions. Experimental brain research 123, 164-171.
Herweg, N.A., Weber, B., Kasparbauer, A., Meyhofer, I., Steffens, M., Smyrnis, N.,
Ettinger, U., 2014. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of sensorimotor
transformations in saccades and antisaccades. Neuroimage 102 Pt 2, 848-860.
Hikosaka, O., Takikawa, Y., Kawagoe, R., 2000. Role of the basal ganglia in the
control of purposive saccadic eye movements. Physiological reviews 80, 953-978.
Husain, M., Parton, A., Hodgson, T.L., Mort, D., Rees, G., 2003. Self-control during
response conflict by human supplementary eye field. Nature neuroscience 6, 117118.

Hutchinson, J.B., Uncapher, M.R., Wagner, A.D., 2009. Posterior parietal cortex and
episodic retrieval: convergent and divergent effects of attention and memory.
Learning & memory 16, 343-356.
Hwang, K., Velanova, K., Luna, B., 2010. Strengthening of top-down frontal cognitive
control networks underlying the development of inhibitory control: a functional
magnetic resonance imaging effective connectivity study. J Neurosci 30, 1553515545.
Isoda, M., Hikosaka, O., 2011. Cortico-basal ganglia mechanisms for overcoming
innate, habitual and motivational behaviors. The European journal of neuroscience
33, 2058-2069.
Jakobs, O., Langner, R., Caspers, S., Roski, C., Cieslik, E.C., Zilles, K., Laird, A.R., Fox,
P.T., Eickhoff, S.B., 2012. Across-study and within-subject functional connectivity of a right
temporo-parietal junction subregion involved in stimulus-context integration. Neuroimage 60,
2389-2398.

Jamadar, S.D., Fielding, J., Egan, G.F., 2013. Quantitative meta-analysis of fMRI and
PET studies reveals consistent activation in fronto-striatal-parietal regions and
cerebellum during antisaccades and prosaccades. Frontiers in psychology 4, 749.
Kelly, R.M., Strick, P.L., 2003. Cerebellar loops with motor cortex and prefrontal
cortex of a nonhuman primate. J Neurosci 23, 8432-8444.
Laird, A.R., Eickhoff, S.B., Li, K., Robin, D.A., Glahn, D.C., Fox, P.T., 2009.
Investigating the functional heterogeneity of the default mode network using
coordinate-based meta-analytic modeling. J Neurosci 29, 14496-14505.
Lancaster, J.L., Tordesillas-Gutierrez, D., Martinez, M., Salinas, F., Evans, A., Zilles,
K., Mazziotta, J.C., Fox, P.T., 2007. Bias between MNI and Talairach coordinates
analyzed using the ICBM-152 brain template. Hum Brain Mapp 28, 1194-1205.

Langner, R., Eickhoff, S.B., 2013. Sustaining attention to simple tasks: a metaanalytic review of the neural mechanisms of vigilant attention. Psychological bulletin
139, 870-900.
Lee, M.H., Smyser, C.D., Shimony, J.S., 2013. Resting-state fMRI: a review of methods and
clinical applications. AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology 34, 1866-1872.

Leech, R., Kamourieh, S., Beckmann, C.F., Sharp, D.J., 2011. Fractionating the
default mode network: distinct contributions of the ventral and dorsal posterior
cingulate cortex to cognitive control. J Neurosci 31, 3217-3224.
Leech, R., Sharp, D.J., 2014. The role of the posterior cingulate cortex in cognition
and disease. Brain : a journal of neurology 137, 12-32.
Leichnetz, G.R., 2001. Connections of the medial posterior parietal cortex (area 7m)
in the monkey. The Anatomical record 263, 215-236.
Luna, B., Thulborn, K.R., Strojwas, M.H., McCurtain, B.J., Berman, R.A., Genovese,
C.R., Sweeney, J.A., 1998. Dorsal cortical regions subserving visually guided
saccades in humans: an fMRI study. Cereb Cortex 8, 40-47.
Lynch, J.C., Tian, J.R., 2006. Cortico-cortical networks and cortico-subcortical loops
for the higher control of eye movements. Progress in brain research 151, 461-501.
Matsuda, T., Matsuura, M., Ohkubo, T., Ohkubo, H., Matsushima, E., Inoue, K.,
Taira, M., Kojima, T., 2004. Functional MRI mapping of brain activation during
visually guided saccades and antisaccades: cortical and subcortical networks.
Psychiatry research 131, 147-155.
Mazoyer, B., Zago, L., Mellet, E., Bricogne, S., Etard, O., Houde, O., Crivello, F.,
Joliot, M., Petit, L., Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., 2001. Cortical networks for working memory
and executive functions sustain the conscious resting state in man. Brain research
bulletin 54, 287-298.

McDowell, J.E., Dyckman, K.A., Austin, B.P., Clementz, B.A., 2008. Neurophysiology
and neuroanatomy of reflexive and volitional saccades: evidence from studies of
humans. Brain Cogn 68, 255-270.
McDowell, J.E., Kissler, J.M., Berg, P., Dyckman, K.A., Gao, Y., Rockstroh, B.,
Clementz, B.A., 2005. Electroencephalography/magnetoencephalography study of
cortical activities preceding prosaccades and antisaccades. Neuroreport 16, 663-668.
Miller, L.M., Sun, F.T., Curtis, C.E., D'Esposito, M., 2005. Functional interactions between
oculomotor regions during prosaccades and antisaccades. Hum Brain Mapp 26, 119-127.

Missal, M., Heinen, S.J., 2001. Facilitation of smooth pursuit initiation by electrical
stimulation in the supplementary eye fields. Journal of neurophysiology 86, 24132425.
Molenberghs, P., Mesulam, M.M., Peeters, R., Vandenberghe, R.R., 2007.
Remapping attentional priorities: differential contribution of superior parietal lobule
and intraparietal sulcus. Cereb Cortex 17, 2703-2712.
Moschner, C., Crawford, T.J., Heide, W., Trillenberg, P., Kompf, D., Kennard, C.,
1999. Deficits of smooth pursuit initiation in patients with degenerative cerebellar
lesions. Brain : a journal of neurology 122 ( Pt 11), 2147-2158.
Munakata, Y., Herd, S.A., Chatham, C.H., Depue, B.E., Banich, M.T., O'Reilly, R.C.,
2011. A unified framework for inhibitory control. Trends in cognitive sciences 15, 453459.
Munoz, D.P., Everling, S., 2004. Look away: the anti-saccade task and the voluntary
control of eye movement. Nat Rev Neurosci 5, 218-228.
Muri, R.M., Iba-Zizen, M.T., Derosier, C., Cabanis, E.A., Pierrot-Deseilligny, C., 1996.
Location of the human posterior eye field with functional magnetic resonance
imaging. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry 60, 445-448.

Palomero-Gallagher, N., Vogt, B.A., Schleicher, A., Mayberg, H.S., Zilles, K., 2009.
Receptor architecture of human cingulate cortex: evaluation of the four-region
neurobiological model. Hum Brain Mapp 30, 2336-2355.
Parton, A., Nachev, P., Hodgson, T.L., Mort, D., Thomas, D., Ordidge, R., Morgan,
P.S., Jackson, S., Rees, G., Husain, M., 2007. Role of the human supplementary eye
field in the control of saccadic eye movements. Neuropsychologia 45, 997-1008.
Paus, T., 1996. Location and function of the human frontal eye-field: a selective
review. Neuropsychologia 34, 475-483.
Pelphrey, K.A., Morris, J.P., Michelich, C.R., Allison, T., McCarthy, G., 2005.
Functional anatomy of biological motion perception in posterior temporal cortex: an
FMRI study of eye, mouth and hand movements. Cereb Cortex 15, 1866-1876.
Pierrot-Deseilligny, C., Muri, R.M., Ploner, C.J., Gaymard, B., Demeret, S., RivaudPechoux, S., 2003. Decisional role of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in ocular
motor behaviour. Brain : a journal of neurology 126, 1460-1473.
Polli, F.E., Barton, J.J., Cain, M.S., Thakkar, K.N., Rauch, S.L., Manoach, D.S., 2005.
Rostral and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex make dissociable contributions during
antisaccade error commission. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102, 15700-15705.
Puce, A., Allison, T., Bentin, S., Gore, J.C., McCarthy, G., 1998. Temporal cortex
activation in humans viewing eye and mouth movements. J Neurosci 18, 2188-2199.
Redcay, E., Kleiner, M., Saxe, R., 2012. Look at this: the neural correlates of initiating
and responding to bids for joint attention. Frontiers in human neuroscience 6, 169.
Robinson, F.R., Fuchs, A.F., 2001. The role of the cerebellum in voluntary eye
movements. Annual review of neuroscience 24, 981-1004.
Robinson, J.L., Laird, A.R., Glahn, D.C., Lovallo, W.R., Fox, P.T., 2010. Metaanalytic
connectivity modeling: delineating the functional connectivity of the human amygdala.
Hum Brain Mapp 31, 173-184.

Rottschy, C., Langner, R., Dogan, I., Reetz, K., Laird, A.R., Schulz, J.B., Fox, P.T.,
Eickhoff, S.B., 2012. Modelling neural correlates of working memory: A coordinatebased meta-analysis. Neuroimage 60, 830-846.
Satterthwaite, T.D., Elliott, M.A., Gerraty, R.T., Ruparel, K., Loughead, J., Calkins,
M.E., Eickhoff, S.B., Hakonarson, H., Gur, R.C., Gur, R.E., Wolf, D.H., 2013. An
improved framework for confound regression and filtering for control of motion artifact
in the preprocessing of resting-state functional connectivity data. Neuroimage 64,
240-256.
Schall, J., 1997. Visuomotor Areas of the Frontal Lobe, in: Rockland, K., Kaas, J.,
Peters, A. (Eds.), Extrastriate Cortex in Primates. Springer US, pp. 527-638.
Schall, J.D., Morel, A., Kaas, J.H., 1993. Topography of supplementary eye field
afferents to frontal eye field in macaque: implications for mapping between saccade
coordinate systems. Visual neuroscience 10, 385-393.
Schall, J.D., Morel, A., King, D.J., Bullier, J., 1995. Topography of visual cortex
connections with frontal eye field in macaque: convergence and segregation of
processing streams. J Neurosci 15, 4464-4487.
Scheperjans, F., Eickhoff, S.B., Homke, L., Mohlberg, H., Hermann, K., Amunts, K.,
Zilles, K., 2008a. Probabilistic maps, morphometry, and variability of cytoarchitectonic
areas in the human superior parietal cortex. Cereb Cortex 18, 2141-2157.
Scheperjans, F., Hermann, K., Eickhoff, S.B., Amunts, K., Schleicher, A., Zilles, K.,
2008b. Observer-independent cytoarchitectonic mapping of the human superior
parietal cortex. Cereb Cortex 18, 846-867.
Schlag-Rey, M., Amador, N., Sanchez, H., Schlag, J., 1997. Antisaccade
performance predicted by neuronal activity in the supplementary eye field. Nature
390, 398-401.

Sereno, M.I., Pitzalis, S., Martinez, A., 2001. Mapping of contralateral space in
retinotopic coordinates by a parietal cortical area in humans. Science 294, 13501354.
Simo, L.S., Krisky, C.M., Sweeney, J.A., 2005. Functional neuroanatomy of
anticipatory behavior: dissociation between sensory-driven and memory-driven
systems. Cereb Cortex 15, 1982-1991.
Skinner, E.I., Fernandes, M.A., 2007. Neural correlates of recollection and familiarity:
a review of neuroimaging and patient data. Neuropsychologia 45, 2163-2179.
Smith, Y., Bevan, M.D., Shink, E., Bolam, J.P., 1998. Microcircuitry of the direct and
indirect pathways of the basal ganglia. Neuroscience 86, 353-387.
Stanton, G.B., Bruce, C.J., Goldberg, M.E., 1995. Topography of projections to
posterior cortical areas from the macaque frontal eye fields. The Journal of
comparative neurology 353, 291-305.
Stuss, D.T., Shallice, T., Alexander, M.P., Picton, T.W., 1995. A multidisciplinary
approach to anterior attentional functions. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 769, 191-211.
Sweeney, J.A., Luna, B., Keedy, S.K., McDowell, J.E., Clementz, B.A., 2007. fMRI
studies of eye movement control: investigating the interaction of cognitive and
sensorimotor brain systems. Neuroimage 36 Suppl 2, T54-60.
Tanaka, M., 2007. Cognitive signals in the primate motor thalamus predict saccade
timing. J Neurosci 27, 12109-12118.
Tanaka, M., Kunimatsu, J., 2011. Contribution of the central thalamus to the
generation of volitional saccades. The European journal of neuroscience 33, 20462057.

Turkeltaub, P.E., Eden, G.F., Jones, K.M., Zeffiro, T.A., 2002. Meta-analysis of the
functional neuroanatomy of single-word reading: method and validation. Neuroimage
16, 765-780.
Turkeltaub, P.E., Eickhoff, S.B., Laird, A.R., Fox, M., Wiener, M., Fox, P., 2012.
Minimizing within-experiment and within-group effects in Activation Likelihood
Estimation meta-analyses. Hum Brain Mapp 33, 1-13.
van den Heuvel, M.P., Hulshoff Pol, H.E., 2010. Exploring the brain network: a review on
resting-state fMRI functional connectivity. European neuropsychopharmacology : the journal
of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology 20, 519-534.

Vogt, B.A., 2005. Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate gyrus.
Nat Rev Neurosci 6, 533-544.
Vogt, B.A., Hof, P.R., Vogt, L.J., 2004. Cingulate Gyrus, in: Paxinos, G., Mai, J.K.,
(Ed.), The Human Nervous System. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 915-949.
Voogd, J., Schraa-Tam, C.K., van der Geest, J.N., De Zeeuw, C.I., 2012. Visuomotor
cerebellum in human and nonhuman primates. Cerebellum 11, 392-410.
Wegener, S.P., Johnston, K., Everling, S., 2008. Microstimulation of monkey
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex impairs antisaccade performance. Experimental brain
research 190, 463-473.
Wipfli, M., Felblinger, J., Mosimann, U.P., Hess, C.W., Schlaepfer, T.E., Muri, R.M.,
2001. Double-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation over the frontal eye field
facilitates triggering of memory-guided saccades. The European journal of
neuroscience 14, 571-575.
Zhu, Q., Zhang, J., Luo, Y.L., Dilks, D.D., Liu, J., 2011. Resting-state neural activity across
face-selective cortical regions is behaviorally relevant. J Neurosci 31, 10323-10330.

zu Eulenburg, P., Caspers, S., Roski, C., Eickhoff, S.B., 2012. Meta-analytical
definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex. Neuroimage 60,
162-169.

Figure legends
Figure 1A: Foci of brain activity with significant convergence across all prosaccade
experiments included in the meta-analysis (cluster-level p < .05, family-wise errorcorrected for multiple comparisons; cluster-forming threshold p < .001 at voxel level).
Figure 1B: Foci of brain activity showing consistent stronger involvement for
antisaccades versus prosaccades (cluster-level p < .05, family-wise error-corrected
for multiple comparisons; cluster-forming threshold p < .001 at voxel level).
Figure 1C: Overlay (in yellow) of results for the meta-analyses across prosaccades
(in red) and across antisaccades versus prosaccades (in green).
Figure

1D:

Brain

regions

showing

significantly

stronger

across-experiment

convergence of prosaccade-related activity compared to antisaccade-specific
convergence are shown in red. Brain regions showing significantly stronger acrossexperiment convergence of antisaccade-specific activity compared to prosaccadespecific convergence are shown in green.

Figure 2: Specific conjoint MACM functional connectivity of the lateral FEF and SEF
(in red) and medial FEF and aMCC (in green). That is, regions depicted in red
revealed increased FC with the lateral vs. medial FEF as well as increased FC with
SEF vs. aMCC. Regions shown in green revealed increased FC with medial vs.
lateral FEF as well as with aMCC vs. SEF.

Figure 3: Specific conjoint RS functional connectivity of lateral FEF and SEF (in red)
and medial FEF and aMCC (in green). That is, regions depicted in red revealed
increased FC with the lateral vs. medial FEF as well as increased FC with SEF vs.
aMCC. Likewise, regions shown in green revealed increased FC with medial vs.
lateral FEF as well as with aMCC vs. SEF.

Paper
Aichert et al., 2011

Subjects
54

Aichert et al., 2011

54

Anderson et al., 1994

8

Brown et al., 2006

10

Brown et al., 2006

10

Brown et al., 2007

11

Chikazoe et al., 2007

24

Dorrichi et al., 1997

10

Dorrichi et al., 1997

10

Ettinger et al., 2009

24

Ettinger et al., 2009

24

Ford et al., 2005

10

Fukomoto-Motoshita et
al, 2009
Law et al., 1997

18

Manoach et al. 2007

21

Matsuda et al. 2004

21

Matsuda et al. 2004

21

O´Discroll et al., 1995

10

Paus et al., 1993

9

Paus et al., 1993

9

Petit et al., 2009

27

Schraa-Tam et al.,
2009
Sweeney et al., 1996

26

9

11

Contrast
Saccades vs
Baseline
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Saccades vs
Baseline
Saccades vs
Baseline
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Saccades vs
Baseline
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Saccades vs
Baseline
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Saccades vs
Baseline
Saccades vs
Baseline
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Saccades vs
Baseline
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Saccades vs
Baseline
Antisaccades vs
Saccades
Saccades vs
Baseline
Saccades vs
Baseline
Saccades vs
Baseline

Design
blocked

fMRI/PET Space
fMRI
MNI

blocked

fMRI

MNI

blocked

PET

TAL

eventrelated
eventrelated
eventrelated
blocked

fMRI

TAL

fMRI

TAL

fMRI

TAL

fMRI

MNI

blocked

PET

TAL

blocked

PET

TAL

blocked

fMRI

TAL

blocked

fMRI

TAL

blocked

fMRI

TAL

blocked

fMRI

MNI

blocked

PET

TAL

eventrelated
blocked

fMRI

TAL

fMRI

MNI

blocked

fMRI

MNI

blocked

PET

TAL

blocked

PET

TAL

blocked

PET

TAL

blocked

fMRI

MNI

blocked

fMRI

MNI

eventrelated

PET

TAL

Sweeney et al., 1996

11

Antisaccades vs
Saccades

Table 1: Experiments included in the meta-analyses

eventrelated

PET

TAL

