Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

Age-related reduced prefrontal-amygdala structural connectivity is associated with lower trait
anxiety
David Clewetta*, Shelby Bachmanb and Mara Mathera,c
a

b

Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, USA
Neuroscience Undergraduate Program, University of Southern California, USA
c
Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, USA

*To whom correspondence should be addressed:
University of Southern California
3715 McClintock Avenue, Room 351
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Email: clewett@usc.edu
Phone: 213-740-9401
Fax: 213-821-5561

Citation: Clewett, D., Bachman, S., & Mather, M. (in press). Age-related reduced prefrontalamygdala structural connectivity is associated with lower trait anxiety. Neuropsychology.

Author Note
This research was supported by grants R01AG038043, RO1AG025340, and K02
AG032309.

1

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

2

Abstract
Objective: A current neuroanatomical model of anxiety posits that greater structural
connectivity between the amygdala and ventral prefrontal cortex (vPFC) facilitates regulatory
control over the amygdala and helps reduce anxiety. However, some neuroimaging studies have
reported contradictory findings, demonstrating a positive rather than negative association
between trait anxiety and amygdala-vPFC white matter integrity. To help reconcile these
findings, we tested the regulatory hypothesis of anxiety circuitry using aging as a model of white
matter decline in the amygdala-vPFC pathway. Methods: We used probabilistic tractography to
trace connections between the amygdala and vPFC in 21 younger, 18 middle-aged, and 15
healthy older adults. The resulting tract estimates were used to extract three indices of whitematter integrity: fractional anisotropy (FA), radial diffusivity (RD) and axial diffusivity (AD).
The relationship between these amygdala-vPFC structural connectivity measures and age and
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) scores were assessed. Results: The tractography results
revealed age-related decline in the FA (p = .005) and radial diffusivity (p = .002) of the
amygdala-vPFC pathway. Contrary to the regulatory hypothesis, we found a positive rather than
negative association between trait anxiety and right amygdala-vPFC FA (p = .01). Conclusion:
These findings argue against the notion that greater amygdala-vPFC structural integrity
facilitates better anxiety outcomes in healthy adults. Instead, our results suggest that white matter
degeneration in this network relates to lower anxiety in older adults.
Keywords: amygdala, prefrontal cortex, anxiety, probabilistic tractography, aging

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

3

Age-related reduced prefrontal-amygdala structural connectivity is associated with lower trait
anxiety
Anxiety is an unpleasant emotional state that involves physical, cognitive, and behavioral
manifestations such as impaired emotion regulation, especially in interpersonal, ambiguous, and
dangerous situations (Endler et al., 1992). Studies investigating the neurobiological basis of
anxiety have implicated the amygdala in various negative affective responses, including the fear
and vigilance that are characteristic of anxiety (Kapp et al., 1994; Oler et al., 2009; Pessoa and
Adolphs, 2010; Whalen, 1998). An increasing number of studies have linked anxiety to complex
functional and structural neural circuitry that is centered on the amygdala (Kim et al., 2011a).
With regard to structural networks, the amygdala is densely and reciprocally connected with
many brain regions involved in emotion and stress regulation, such as the prefrontal cortex (PFC;
Dolcos et al., 2011). It has been suggested that an altered balance between activity in the
amygdala and PFC could be a neural mechanism underlying anxiety (Bishop, 2008).
Converging findings from animal and human research suggest that anxiety-related
behaviors involve top-down regulatory influences from the vPFC to the amygdala (Banks et al.,
2007; Ghashghaei et al., 2007; Stein et al., 2007a). This framework is supported by functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies showing that successful emotion regulation is
associated with lower amygdala activity and greater vPFC activity (Hariri et al., 2000; Hartley
and Phelps, 2010; Wager et al., 2008). Other fMRI studies have linked amygdala-vPFC circuitry
to the negative interpretation of emotionally ambiguous expressions, a threat-related perceptual
bias that manifests in normal and pathological levels of anxiety (Bishop, 2007).
Since these affective processes are affected in both normal and pathological anxiety, it
follows that the amygdalar circuitry implicated in these behaviors is also implicated in anxiety
(Milad et al., 2006). Several fMRI studies have demonstrated a negative association between trait

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

4

anxiety and amygdala-vPFC functional connectivity, both at rest and during task-based
paradigms (Bishop et al., 2004; Hare et al., 2008; Simpson et al., 2001). Another study found
that greater resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) between the amygdala and vPFC
predicted lower trait and state anxiety in psychiatrically healthy individuals (Kim et al., 2011a).
Together, these studies suggest that higher anxiety is associated with reduced functional
connectivity between the amygdala and vPFC.
Studies also suggest that anxiety-related decreases in amygdala-vPFC functional
connectivity are associated with underlying structural declines. In accordance with functional
findings, both human and animal studies suggest that structural connectivity between the
amygdala and ventral prefrontal cortex (vPFC) also plays an important role in behaviors that are
compromised in anxiety, including emotion regulation and fear conditioning (Cisler et al., 2009;
Hare et al., 2008; Phelps et al., 2004). In psychiatrically healthy individuals, trait anxiety has
been shown to be negatively associated with both the white matter integrity and volume of the
left uncinate fasciculus, a dense white matter bundle that connects the amygdala to the vPFC
(Baur et al., 2012; Bracht et al., 2009; Kim and Whalen, 2009). Patients with social anxiety
disorder (SAD) also exhibit lower uncinate fasciculus integrity compared with healthy, agematched controls (Phan et al., 2009).
To account for these findings, Kim et al. (2011a) proposed that the vPFC exerts a “topdown” influence on the amygdala, wherein better regulatory control is facilitated by both
increased structural connectivity and functional connectivity between these regions (Ghashghaei
and Barbas, 2002; Kim and Whalen, 2009; Kim et al., 2011b). However other neuroimaging
studies have reported findings that contradict this regulatory model. Several diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) studies have demonstrated that higher trait anxiety scores are associated with

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

5

increased rather than decreased structural integrity of the uncinate fasciculus (Modi et al., 2013;
Montag et al., 2012). Similarly, another DTI study showed that the severity of anxiety in
individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) was positively associated with the
integrity of the internal capsule, a pathway that may encompass some amygdala-vPFC
connections that are not part of the uncinate fasciculus (Lochner et al., 2012). Thus, while the
amygdala-vPFC pathway is consistently implicated in anxiety, the significance of the structural
integrity of this circuitry to anxiety remains unclear.
Whereas most of these findings were derived from younger adults, less is known about
how changes in this pathway relate to anxiety in older adults. While anxiety is characterized by
an attentional bias towards processing aversive information (Mathews and MacLeod, 2002),
older adults demonstrate a positivity effect in which, relative to younger adults, they show
preferences for positive over negative information in both attention and memory (Charles et al.,
2003; Mather and Carstensen, 2003). Indeed, several investigations have reported age-related
reductions in trait anxiety and anxiety disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
and SAD (Lindesay et al., 1989; Regier et al., 1990). Given evidence that successful emotion and
anxiety regulation relies on prefrontal control over the amygdala, a logical assumption would be
that older adults have greater structural integrity in this circuitry than younger adults. Yet
previous DTI studies have instead revealed significant age-related white matter decline between
the amygdala and prefrontal cortex (Burzynska et al., 2010; Davis et al., 2009a), particularly in
measures of fractional anisotropy (FA) and radial diffusivity (RD), which are sensitive to
changes in myelin integrity (Schmierer et al., 2004). Age-related white matter decline is
particularly robust in the frontal lobe, with pathways linking the amygdala to the vPFC declining
early on (Head et al., 2004; Malykhin et al., 2011; Salat et al., 2005). However, if the regulatory

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

6

model is correct, age-related decline in amygdala-vPFC structural connectivity should be
associated with increased anxiety. Here, we used aging as a model of amygdala-vPFC structural
decline to test the hypothesis that the structural integrity of this pathway relates to trait anxiety.
In order to test this hypothesis, we utilized probabilistic tractography, a structural
imaging technique that enables white matter pathways to be traced in vivo (Behrens et al., 2007).
Tractography is performed by tracing white matter “streamlines” between a pair of brain regions
based on patterns of water diffusion in brain tissue. Since water diffusion is fastest along the
length of axons, this technique can be used to estimate the topography and integrity of
neuroanatomical connections. In turn, these tract estimates can be used to extract white matter
indices, such as FA, RD, and axial diffusivity (AD), which serve as scalar measures of structural
integrity. White matter tractography has been successfully implemented in previous DTI studies
to examine white matter connections between the amygdala and frontal cortex (Bach et al., 2011;
Saygin et al., 2011). To date, the majority of anxiety studies have focused on white matter
decline in the uncinate fasciculus. However, some tractography studies have delineated
additional structural connections between the amygdala and vPFC that course through the
extreme capsule and more medially through peri-striatal regions, such as the substantia
innominata (Croxson et al., 2005; Johansen-Berg et al., 2008; Kim and Whalen, 2009). These
findings suggest that the uncinate fasciculus region-of-interest might not capture the full extent
of this anxiety circuit. Thus, we used probabilistic tractography to trace participant-specific white
matter pathways between the amygdala and vPFC.
In the present study, we used aging as a model of structural decline in the amygdalavPFC pathway to test whether structural changes contribute to higher trait anxiety. Trait anxiety
represents an individual’s generalized and long-lasting predisposition to respond to stress with

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

7

apprehension and foreboding (Lueck, 2007), suggesting that it may be linked to more stable
brain characteristics, such as the structural rather than functional integrity of circuits underlying
stress and emotion processing. To quantify age-related changes in amygdala-vPFC structural
connectivity, we analyzed tract FA, RD, AD and volume in three age groups ranging from
younger to older adults. Only healthy, non-clinically-diagnosed participants were selected for
analysis in order to compare our results to earlier findings in healthy younger adults (Kim and
Whalen, 2009). We predicted that mean amygdala-vPFC FA and RD would decline with age. To
test the regulatory anxiety model (Kim et al., 2011a), we also examined whether this structural
change was associated with a concomitant increase in trait anxiety.
Methods
The behavioral and imaging data for this study were obtained from the Nathan Kline
Institute’s (NKI) Rockland Sample, a component of the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project
(http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/index.html). Participants completed semi-structured
diagnostic psychiatric interviews and a variety of cognitive and behavioral assessments in order
to thoroughly explore brain-behavior relationships.
Participants
A group of 54 healthy, right-handed male and female participants were selected from the
NKI dataset according to several criteria. None of the participants exhibited hypertensive or
prehypertensive systolic or diastolic blood pressure values, and all scored within the normal
range on the Beck Depressive Index (BDI; Beck et al., 1961). The participants’ DTI and T1weighted structural images were also closely examined to ensure they were free of image
artifacts resulting from head motion, signal drop-out, blurring, or structural abnormalities. The
selected participants were divided into three different age groups: 21 younger adults (age 19-29),

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

8

18 middle-aged adults (age 40-50), and 15 older adults (age 60-85). Details of the group
assignments are described in Table 1.
Behavioral Data
Trait anxiety was evaluated using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), a common
measure of adult anxiety that distinguishes anxiety from depressive symptoms (Spielberger et al.,
1983). The STAI is a 40-item assessment that applies a multifaceted definition of anxiety by
dissociating trait anxiety from state anxiety. Trait anxiety is defined as a stable aspect of
personality that describes an individual’s tendency to respond to a situation with anxiety, while
state anxiety refers to a transitory state of emotional arousal (Endler and Kocovski, 2001).
Higher scores on the STAI indicate higher trait anxiety levels. All participants fell within the
normal range for anxiety (M = 32.83, SD = 9.75). Scores on the BDI scale were also used to
assess whether participants fell within the clinical range for severe depression, i.e., scores 29-63.
All participants fell within the non-severely-depressed range (M = 3.63, SD = 4.52). One male
middle-aged adult (BDI = 23) and one female older adult (BDI = 15) who had depression scores
that qualified as “mild depression” (BDI = 14-19) were kept for analysis.
A Shapiro-Wilk test of normality determined that both BDI and trait anxiety scores
violated the assumption of normality (ps < .05). Given this result, Spearman’s rho correlations
were used to examine associations between gender, BDI and trait anxiety. Gender and BDI were
both significantly correlated with trait anxiety (rho = -.31, p = .024, rho = .36, p = .008,
respectively). Thus, BDI and gender were modeled as nuisance covariates in subsequent
analyses.
Image Acquisition

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

9

Diffusion tensor imaging. A 64-direction diffusion tensor imaging sequence was
implemented using parallel imaging acceleration (GRAPPA), factor = 3. A total of 76 diffusionweighted images were acquired (axial slices = 58; TR/TE = 10/91ms; FOV = 256mm; b-value =
1000 s/mm2; in-plane resolution = 2x2mm2; slice thickness = 2mm; slice gap = 0mm). The total
acquisition time for the protocol was 13 minutes and 32 seconds.
T1-weighted structural imaging. A high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical image
(MPRAGE) was also obtained to facilitate diffusion image co-registration (slabs = 1; slices =
192; TR/TE/TI= 2500/3.5/1200ms; FOV = 256m; flip angle = 8 degrees; isotropic voxel
dimensions = 1mm3; multi-slice mode = single-shot). The total acquisition time for this
anatomical scan was 10 minutes and 42 seconds.
Image Preprocessing
DTI and MRI preprocessing was carried out using tools from FSL Version 4.1.6 (FMRIB
Software Library, www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl). The Brain Extraction Tool (BET) was used to
remove non-brain tissue from the diffusion-weighted images and high-resolution T1 structural
images. The effects of eddy currents and head movement were reduced and corrected by aligning
the diffusion-weighted images to a non-diffusion reference image using linear registration with
12 degrees of freedom. FSL’s FNIRT tool was used to perform non-linear registration between
each participant’s T1-image and a 2mm MNI standard brain. The resulting transformation
matrices were concatenated and inverted to create standard-to-diffusion space and diffusion-tostandard space transformation matrices, respectively. The results of each preprocessing step were
carefully inspected to verify their accuracy.
Anatomical definition of amygdala. Separate left and right amygdala masks were handdrawn onto each participant’s T1-weighted image in the coronal plane according to tracing

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

10

procedures described by Allen et al. (2005). Superior, inferior, medial and lateral boundaries
were first demarcated, and the amygdala was carefully traced in the medial temporal lobe as an
ovoid-shaped grey matter mass and separated from neighboring grey matter (GM), white matter
(WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The anterior boundary of the amygdala was arbitrarily
defined in a coronal slice exactly three slices posterior to the slice where the frontal lobe merges
with the temporal lobe. In more anterior slices, the superior boundary of the amygdala was
defined as the CSF within the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle, whereas the visible greywhite matter boundary served as the superior border in more posterior slices. The dorsomedial
boundary was defined as CSF. The lateral boundary was defined as the border between amygdala
grey matter and parahippocampal white matter. In more anterior coronal slices, the inferior
boundary was first demarcated by parahippocampal white matter and extended dorso-medially
until the line connected with CSF. As the amygdala ascended above the emerging hippocampal
grey matter in more posterior slices, the inferior boundary was traced along the white matter
strand of the alveus. The final amygdala masks were visually inspected by trained researchers to
verify their accuracy.
Anatomical definition of vPFC. The processing pipeline used to create the vPFC masks
is depicted in Figure 1. The left and right hemisphere vPFC anatomical masks were created in
MNI standard space. These masks were generated by combining anatomical gyri defined by the
Laboratory of NeuroImaging (LONI) Probabilistic Brain Atlas (LPBA40;
http://www.loni.ucla.edu/Atlases/LPBA40; Shattuck et al., 2007) and the Harvard-Oxford
Cortical Structural Atlas (http://www.cma.mgh.harvard.edu/fsl_atlas.html). First, a mask of the
entire prefrontal cortex was created by combining gyri from the LONI atlas corresponding to the
inferior, medial, and superior frontal gyri, the lateral and medial orbitofrontal gyri, and the gyrus

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

11

rectus. In addition, the Harvard-Oxford Atlas version of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was
also included in this mask. The resulting frontal lobe mask was partitioned into a ventral-only
portion, with the ventral mask bounded by an axial slice at MNI Z-coordinate = 37 mm. This
superior boundary was defined in the mid-sagittal plane by extending a line posteriorly from the
point where the medial orbital sulcus meets the frontal pole back to the genu of the corpus
callosum. The standard-space vPFC mask was thresholded at 50% GM tissue-type probability to
increase the likelihood that the voxels belonged to GM.
To encompass white matter fibers passing near grey matter, the vPFC masks were dilated
by 4mm in every direction (Bach et al., 2011). The dilation was used to account for the low
resolution of the diffusion images and partial voluming at the WM-GM border. The resulting left
and right hemisphere masks were combined and the overlap was subtracted in order to reduce
any inter-hemispheric overlap produced by dilation. FSL’s automated segmentation tool (FAST)
was used to segment each participant’s T1-weighted image into probabilistic tissue-type masks
corresponding to GM, WM, and CSF. The GM masks were thresholded to include voxels with at
least a 35% probability of belonging to GM and subsequently binarized. Each standard-spacedefined vPFC mask was then written into each participant’s structural space and merged with
their respective GM masks in order to produce participant-specific GM vPFC masks. Each
participant’s vPFC mask was then linearly transformed from structural to diffusion space using 7
degrees of freedom. These participant-specific vPFC masks served as seed and target cortical
masks in the subsequent tractography and ROI analyses.
DTI Analysis
Probabilistic tractography. Probabilistic tractography between the amygdala and the
vPFC was performed in each participant’s native diffusion space using FSL’s probtrackx tool.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

12

Tractography was carried out separately for the left and right brain hemispheres. Probabilistic
connectivity distributions were generated for each brain voxel by repeatedly sampling ipsilateral
pathways between the amygdala and vPFC (Behrens et al., 2007; Johansen-Berg and Behrens,
2009). FSL’s FIRST tool was used to parcellate the left and right thalami from every individual’s
T1-weighted structural image. The thalami were used as exclusion mask to exclude indirect
connections between the amygdala and vPFC. To increase the reliability of the estimated
amygdala-vPFC pathway, fiber tracking was initiated in both directions (i.e., amygdala-to-vPFC
and vPFC-to-amygdala). A total of 5000 streamline samples were sent out from each voxel in the
amygdala or vPFC seed region. Every sample was tracked to its ipsilateral target with a step
length of 0.5mm and a curvature threshold of 0.2. Fiber tracking was also constrained to voxels
with an FA value > 0.2 to ensure that streamlines passed through white matter. The bidirectional
fiber tracking resulted in two tracts in which each voxel’s value represented the total number of
successful streamline samples (i.e., the waytotal; successful samples out of N seed voxels x
5000) that passed through it. To calculate the probability that each voxel belonged to the
amygdala-vPFC pathway, the amygdalo-frontal and fronto-amygdala tracts were normalized by
their respective waytotals and combined according to the following formula: [(A+B) – (AxB)]
(Hughes et al., 2012). The resulting amygdala-vPFC tract was thresholded at 0.01 to remove any
spurious connections and binarized for subsequent analyses.
Group probability maps. To acquire reliable spatial estimates of the amygdala-vPFC
pathways for each age group, group probability maps were created. For every individual, the
estimated amygdala-vPFC tracts were binarized. These binary tracts were summed across all of
the participants within the three age groups: young adults, middle-aged adults and older adults.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

13

The group probability maps were thresholded such that each voxel along the putative amygdalavPFC tract was present in at least 25% of the participants within that age group.
FA, RD, AD and volume of amygdala-vPFC pathway. To estimate the structural
integrity of the amygdala-vPFC pathway, each participant’s amygdala-vPFC tract was applied to
his or her respective FA, RD, and AD maps and mean values were extracted. AD refers to the
principal eigenvector (λ1) and is believed to reflect the integrity of axon (Glenn et al., 2003). RD
refers to the average of the two eigenvectors perpendicular to the principal eigenvector [(λ2+ λ3)
/2] and is sensitive to myelin integrity (Schmierer et al., 2004). Whereas high FA values indicate
greater structural integrity, high RD and AD values indicate lower pathway integrity.
As a measure of the trackability, or reliability, of the white matter connections across age
groups, the volume of the estimated amygdala-vPFC tracts was acquired in each participant’s
native diffusion space. The SIENAX tool in FSL was used to determine each participant’s
intracranial volume (ICV). These ICV values were then used to normalize the native-space tract
volumes to enable cross-participant comparisons in stereotaxic space.
To investigate the effect of age on mean amygdala-vPFC FA, RD, AD, and tract volume,
separate two-way repeated-measures ANOVAs were carried out with hemisphere (2: left and
right) as a within-subjects factor and age category (3: younger adults, middle-aged adults, older
adults) and gender (2: male and female) as between-subjects factors. Bonferroni-corrected posthoc t-tests were performed to test for significant main effects of age group, hemisphere, and
gender.
Robust linear regression analysis: associations between age, anxiety, and amygdalavPFC FA. To examine the relationship between trait anxiety and mean amygdala-vPFC pathway
FA, four separate robust linear regression analyses were conducted. Given the non-normal,

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

14

skewed distribution of BDI scores across the group, we used a robust regression technique, a
modified Theil-Sen estimator, to test for relationships between the mean right/left amygdalaVPFC and trait anxiety (Wilcox, 2004). This robust linear regression approach is more
insensitive to outliers than simple linear regression and has been shown to yield more accurate
results for skewed and heteroskedastic data. Separate linear regressions were performed for the
left and right brain hemispheres due to significant covariance in the white matter measures (ps >
.05). In the first two regressions (one per hemisphere), gender and BDI were modeled as
nuisance covariates (Baur et al., 2012; Kim and Whalen, 2009). In the second two regressions
(one per hemisphere), gender, BDI and age were modeled as covariates to determine whether
amygdala-vPFC pathway FA could account for unique variance in trait anxiety scores above and
beyond the influence of age. Since four robust regressions were performed, a Bonferroni
correction of p < .0125 was used to assess the statistical significance of the results (p < .05/4
tests = .0125).
Results
Amygdala-vPFC Probabilistic Tractography Results
The bidirectional probabilistic tractography results were consistent with previous findings
of several fronto-temporal white matter pathways between the amygdala and vPFC. Specifically,
these connections included the uncinate fasciculus, extreme capsule, and more distinct medial
connections adjacent to the ventral striatum (Croxson et al., 2005; Johansen-Berg et al., 2008;
Kim and Whalen, 2009). The tractography results are displayed in Figures 2 and 3. To illustrate
the white matter paths captured by tractography, a comparison of the spatial distribution between
our group-estimated tract and an uncinate-fasciculus-only ROI derived from the JHU White
Matter Tractography Atlas in FSL is displayed in Figure 2. The tractography algorithm

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

15

delineated white matter connections that passed more medially than the uncinate fasciculus and
into peri-striatal regions, such as the substantia innominata.
Amygdala-vPFC Group Probability Maps
To determine the inter-participant reliability of the amygdala-vPFC tractography results,
we created probability maps across the entire group (see Figure 3). These group probability maps
represent how consistently each brain voxel appeared in the amygdala-vPFC pathway across the
participants. The probability maps revealed that the tractography performed relatively well
across all of the participants in discerning various amygdala-vPFC pathways that were consistent
with the underlying anatomy.
Age Differences in White Matter Measures
We performed a two-way repeated-measures ANOVA to examine the effects of age on
mean FA, RD, AD and tract volume in the left and right amygdala-vPFC structural pathways.
Brain hemisphere was modeled as a within-subjects factor, while both gender and age were
modeled as between-subjects factors. The results of these analyses are displayed in Figure 4.
Fractional anisotropy results. Mean amygdala-vPFC FA significantly decreased with
age, F(2,48) = 5.88, p = .005, η2 = .2. Bonferroni-corrected follow-up t-tests revealed that mean
amygdala-vPFC FA was significantly higher in younger (M = .39; SD = .021) and middle-aged
adults (M = .39; SD = .017) than in older adults (M = .38; SD = .022; YA > OA: p = .008, MA >
OA: p = .018). However, mean FA did not significantly differ between younger and middle-aged
adults. We also found a significant main effect of gender on mean amygdala-vPFC FA, F(1,48)
= 5.38, p = .025, η2 = .1, such that males exhibited significantly greater mean amygdala-vPFC FA
than did females. We did not observe a significant main effect of hemisphere nor any interaction
effects (ps > .10).

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

16

Radial diffusivity results. Mean amygdala-vPFC radial diffusivity significantly
decreased with age, F(2,48) = 6.81, p = .002, η2 = .22, but did not differ between males and
females, F(1,48) = 1.94, p = .17, η2 = .039. This age-related trend followed a U-shaped trajectory,
with radial diffusivity being lowest in middle-aged adults and highest in older adults (Figure
4D). This pattern is consistent with evidence of delayed myelination in this prefrontal pathway,
with myelination reaching its peak around age 35 and not rapidly decreasing until the age of 55
(Bartzokis et al., 2012). A follow-up t-test revealed that mean amygdala-vPFC radial diffusivity
was significantly higher in older than younger (p = .013) and middle-aged (p = .003) adults.
However, mean amygdala-vPFC radial diffusivity did not significantly differ between younger
and middle-aged adults (p > .10). We also found a significant main effect of hemisphere on mean
amygdala-vPFC radial diffusivity, F(1,48) = 62.78, p < .001, η2 = .57, with higher radial
diffusivity in the left than right hemisphere. We did not observe any significant interaction
effects.
Axial diffusivity results. Mean amygdala-vPFC axial diffusivity did not significantly
differ between age groups, F(2,48) = 1.09, p = .35, η2 = .043, or genders, F(1,48) = 0.3, p = .59,
η2 =

.006, suggesting that the axonal integrity of this pathway remains relatively intact across the

lifespan (Figure 4C). However, we found a significant main effect of hemisphere, F(1,48) =
35.55, p < .001, η2 = .43. A Bonferroni-corrected follow-up t-test revealed that this hemisphere
effect was driven by greater axial diffusivity in the left than right hemisphere. We did not
observe any significant interaction effects.
Tract volume results. The ICV-normalized amygdala-vPFC tract volumes did not
significantly differ between age groups or genders (ps > .05). We also did not observe any
significant interaction effects. These results indicate that, in spite of white matter integrity

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

17

decline in older adults, the trackability of this pathway was relatively stable across age groups
(see Figure 2).
Association between Amygdala-vPFC FA and Trait Anxiety
To test our hypotheses that age, amygdala-vPFC FA and trait anxiety would be associated
with each other, we performed robust linear correlations using a modified Theil-Sen estimator
while controlling for the effects of gender and BDI scores (Baur et al., 2012). Contrary to the
negative correlations seen in Kim and Whalen (2009), we found positive associations between
mean amygdala-vPFC FA and trait anxiety for both the right (ß = .35, p = .01) and left (ß = .34, p
= .033) hemispheres. Given our Bonferroni-correction cut-off of p < .0125, only the relationship
in the right amygdala-vPFC pathway was deemed significant.
To examine whether age alone could account for the direct influence of mean right
amygdala-vPFC FA on trait anxiety, we conducted an additional robust linear regression while
also controlling for age. We found a trend towards a positive correlation between mean right
amygdala-vPFC FA and trait anxiety (ß = .16, p = .18). Since age, mean right amygdala-vPFC
FA and trait anxiety were all inter-correlated, we performed a follow-up Sobel test to explore the
strength of a potential age mediation effect. The age mediation effect was not significant (p > .2).
Discussion
Our findings argue against the notion that structural integrity of the amygdala-vPFC
pathway helps facilitate better anxiety outcomes in healthy adults. Whereas this pathway is
typically conceptualized as a regulatory circuit, we instead found that amygdala-vPFC FA was
significantly positively correlated with trait anxiety. We argue that, even if the positive
relationship between amygdala-vPFC FA and trait anxiety is driven by age influences over both
variables, it is an important finding when considering the regulatory model that posits that

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

18

greater structural connectivity between the amygdala and vPFC facilitates regulatory control
over the amygdala and helps reduce anxiety. At the very least, it provides a boundary condition
on when such a positive relationship should occur. This study expands upon previously mixed
findings regarding the relationship between amygdala-vPFC structural connectivity and trait
anxiety, suggesting that caution should be taken when interpreting the significance of this
circuitry to anxiety.
As predicted, the DTI analysis revealed a negative association between age and the white
matter integrity of amygdala-vPFC structural connectivity. This age-related decrease in
amygdala-vPFC FA is consistent with previous evidence of age-related white matter decline
along the amygdala-vPFC pathway (Burzynska et al., 2010). We determined that this age effect
was predominantly driven by a decrease in radial rather than axial diffusivity, suggesting that
age-related changes in white matter between the amygdala and vPFC was more likely associated
with myelin degeneration rather than a loss of axonal integrity. Consistent with our results,
previous DTI studies have indicated that age-related degeneration of white matter primarily
results from axonal demyelination and is characteristic of normal aging (Davis et al., 2009a;
Madden et al., 2009). Notably, higher anisotropy can also occur in the absence of myelin,
suggesting that age-related increases in FA could result from other axonal structural features,
such as the packing density of axons within a given voxel (Beaulieu, 2002). Thus, while it is
tempting to speculate that our RD finding relates to demyelination, the underlying physiological
changes remain unclear. One recent DTI study in older adults demonstrated a negative
association between anxiety symptoms and white matter health in the superior longitudinal
fasciculus, but not in the uncinate fasciculus, suggesting that structural decline in alternative
brain pathways contributes to anxiety in later adulthood (Bijanki et al., 2013). This relationship

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

19

was only observed in older participants with atherosclerosis, a vascular disease that has been
associated with anxious symptoms (Stillman et al., 2012). By comparison, none of our
participants had issues with vascular health, and we found a positive association between trait
anxiety and FA the amygdala-vPFC pathway. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that the relationship
between white matter integrity and anxiety appears to become increasingly complex in older
adults, because they are more likely to have widespread diffusion abnormalities that signify
actual physiological changes or additional sources of diffusion image artifacts.
In addition to declining with age, the integrity of amygdala-vPFC connections was
positively associated with trait anxiety. Importantly, this finding contradicts the prevailing
regulatory model of anxiety, which posits that greater white matter integrity affords greater topdown control of the amygdala by the vPFC (Kim et al., 2011a). According to this model, the
vPFC regulates the output of the amygdala to control anxiety, so less structural connectivity
disables top-down control over the amygdala and, consequently, leads to increases in anxiety.
Whereas several studies have demonstrated a negative correlation between trait anxiety and
structural integrity of the amygdala-vPFC pathway (Baur et al., 2012; Kim and Whalen, 2009),
other studies have instead reported a positive relationship between trait anxiety and amygdalavPFC FA (Modi et al., 2013; Montag et al., 2012).
One explanation for this positive association is that many of the investigations
demonstrating a negative relationship used an uncinate fasciculus ROI, which encompasses some
but not all of the white matter connections between the amygdala and vPFC (Croxson et al.,
2005; Johansen-Berg et al., 2008; Kim and Whalen, 2009). In previous research, one of these
more posterior tracts, the external capsule, has shown increased RD in older adults, suggesting
that this area is possibly impacted by normal age-related demyelination (Bennett et al., 2010).

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

20

Our data supported this finding, though our single-value measure of RD spanned the entire
length of the amygdala-vPFC pathway. In contrast to our tracts delineated by probabilistic
tractography, the uncinate fasciculus branches toward the lenticular nucleus and the insula
(Papagno, 2011). Recent evidence suggests that both structural and functional connectivity
between the left amygdala and anterior insula is associated with both normal and pathological
levels of anxiety (Baur et al., 2013). For instance, anxiety-prone individuals show greater insula
activation during the presentation of emotional stimuli (Ball et al., 2012; Stein et al., 2007b). In
line with these findings, other studies have shown increased functional connectivity between the
amygdala and insula in threatening situations (Rosso et al., 2010). An important advantage of our
study is that we utilized probabilistic tractography to specifically delineate amygdala-vPFC
connections. As a result, we were able to examine anxiety-structure relationships unique to
prefrontal cortical connections.
An alternative to the regulatory model is that anxiety arises from higher-than-normal
amygdala activity as opposed to decreased regulatory activity of the vPFC. Probabilistic
tractography enabled us to trace white matter connections between the amygdala and vPFC that
course more medially than the uncinate fasiculus and pass through the substantia innominata and
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST). A wealth of evidence from rodent (Walker and
Davis, 2008), monkey (Fox et al., 2008) and human (Alvarez et al., 2010) studies has linked
these regions to maintaining anxiety during sustained threat, thereby implicating their
involvement in more trait - as opposed to state - aspects of anxiety responses. Specifically,
prolonged anxiety has been associated with activity in an extended network consisting of
amygdala sub-nuclei, the BNST and hypothalamus (Davis et al., 2009b). Notably, in healthy
younger adults, Kim and Whalen (2009) localized a significant positive association between

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

21

amygdala-vPFC pathway FA and amygdala reactivity to fearful faces, a putative biomarker of
sensitivity to anxiety, to voxels within the substantia innominata (Kim and Whalen, 2009). While
individual differences in participants’ amygdala reactivity did not correlate with trait anxiety in
their study, this result aligns with our current findings of a positive association between
amygdala-based white matter networks and anxiety. The age-related reduction in amygdalavPFC pathway integrity we observed might therefore represent the uncoupling of an anxietysustaining circuit, which could relate to better anxiety outcomes in older adults.
In addition to peri-striatal regions, the amygdala and medial orbitofrontal gyrus (mOFC)
– a portion of the vPFC - share reciprocal functional and anatomical connections (Ghashghaei et
al., 2007; Milad and Quirk, 2002), suggesting that both feedback and feedforward interactions
influence anxiety processes. Supporting this reciprocity, patients with social anxiety disorder
exhibit enhanced effective connectivity from the amygdala to the mOFC and vice versa,
indicating that an altered balance in amygdala-mOFC activity contributes to pathological anxiety
(Liao et al., 2010). This finding agrees with a separate effective connectivity study in healthy
adults in which the amygdala appeared to modulate subgenual vPFC activity, whereas the vPFC
exerted top-down influences over the amygdala (Stein et al., 2007a). Bottom-up signals from the
amygdala to the subgenual sector of the vPFC are believed to be a mechanism by which the
amygdala labels the emotional significance of events (Phillips et al., 2003). Enhanced amygdalar
output might therefore mislabel the motivational significance of non-threatening stimuli, leading
to maladaptive attentional processing and a state of distress. Thus, while many studies point to
de-regulation of the amygdala as a source of anxiety, it remains unclear how dysfunctional crosstalk between the amygdala and vPFC relates to underlying structural changes. The prevailing
regulatory model of anxiety posits that lower amygdala-vPFC structural integrity disrupts

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

22

inhibitory feedback and leads to greater anxiety (Kim et al., 2011a), yet because the pathway is
bidirectional, it is also possible that greater amygdala-vPFC white matter integrity supports
increased threat-related processing biases initiated by the amygdala.
Supporting the importance of feedforward aspects of amygdala-vPFC circuitry, both
animal and human studies have implicated this pathway in the body’s adaptive stress response
(Herman et al., 2005). Whereas the regulatory model predicts that the amygdala-vPFC pathway
serves to inhibit stress responses, a number of findings suggest the opposite, showing that this
pathway may in fact amplify stress (Myers-Schulz and Koenigs, 2012). For example, increased
functional coupling between the amygdala and ventromedial PFC (vmPFC) – a sector of the PFC
that fell within the larger vPFC mask used in our study - has been reported in individuals with a
polymorphism of the human serotonin transporter gene, a genetic variant associated with greater
amygdala reactivity to aversive stimuli and increased anxiety-related temperament (Heinz et al.,
2004). In rodents, a dorsal-ventral dissociation exists such that dorsal medial PFC activity relates
to the inhibition of amygdala responses, whereas more vmPFC activity is associated with
enhanced hypothalamo-pituitary axis output (Cerqueira et al., 2008; Myers-Schulz and Koenigs,
2012). Similarly, human patients with vmPFC lesions show reduced skin conductance responses
and lower autonomic reactivity to social stimuli (Damasio et al., 1990). Together these findings
support a positive association between greater autonomic arousal and amygdala-vPFC structural
connectivity in which more efficient communication between the amygdala and vPFC is
associated with an enhancement rather than inhibition of anxiety and stress responses. Thus,
while it is evident that the amygdala-vPFC circuitry is centrally involved in anxiety, it is
conceivable that greater myelination in this pathway also permits greater amygdala-driven
modulation of prefrontal function (Bishop, 2007). One limitation of our study is that probabilistic

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

23

tractography cannot inform the directionality of neural communication between brain regions, so
we were unable to test the regulatory versus facilitatory nature of the amygdala-vPFC circuit.
According to the current regulatory model of anxiety, age-related degeneration in the
white matter connecting the amygdala and vPFC should disrupt top-down regulation of the
amygdala, leading to poorer anxiety outcomes in older adults. However, our findings contradict
this hypothesis by showing that, in spite of an age-related decrease in amygdala-vPFC structural
integrity, trait anxiety decreased with age. Previous studies have reported mixed findings
regarding age-related changes in anxiety, so it is unclear whether age is associated with either
normal or pathological anxiety (Flint, 1994). Consistent with our results, many investigations
have reported age-related reductions in trait anxiety (Lindesay et al., 1989; Regier et al., 1990).
In the current study, it is possible that the lower trait anxiety observed in older adults resulted
from an inability of the STAI to capture alternative sources of anxiety in older adults. While
there are age group-specific scales that assess anxiety-related brain changes across the lifespan,
using the STAI allowed for a direct comparison between older and younger adults. This decision
was also supported by one study showing that 43% of psychiatrically healthy geriatric inpatients
had clinically significant scores on the STAI; moreover, a factor analysis revealed that this
finding was driven primarily by worries of well-being (Kvaal et al., 2001), suggesting that the
symptoms assessed by the STAI are sufficient to identify high-anxiety individuals in the early
and late lifespan.
In addition, we observed significant sex differences in amygdala-vPFC FA, suggesting
that these connections may facilitate different anxiety outcomes in males and females. One fMRI
study showed that stress-induced patterns of amygdala functional connectivity differ between
males and females (Mather et al., 2010). Although sex differences in the relationship between the

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

24

structure of this pathway and anxiety have not been directly studied, one investigation found that
a positive correlation between trait anxiety and the integrity of the uncinate fasciculus was driven
primarily by males (Montag et al., 2012). Intriguingly, higher trait anxiety has been associated
with greater amygdala responses to unattended fearful faces in females than males (Dickie and
Armony, 2008), which may account for females being more susceptible to anxiety and
depression than males (Leach et al., 2008). Testing these sex differences using a combination of
tractography and effective functional connectivity would enlighten our understanding of how
males and females differentially experience and regulate their anxiety.
Several study limitations warrant further consideration. First, we acknowledge that our
sample sizes in both groups were moderate. Nonetheless, the significance of our brain-behavior
results, particularly showing a clear positive rather negative association between amygdala-vPFC
connectivity and trait anxiety – highlights the need to revisit the widely accepted regulatory
model of this pathway and consider alternative explanations. Second, our cross-sectional samples
prevents us from making causal inferences, necessitating follow-up longitudinal studies to
confirm that our results reflect age-related developmental changes in white matter integrity that
lead to shifts in trait anxiety, rather than some other causal pathway.
We chose to examine a non-anxious population for two reasons: first, examining a nonclinical sample with the STAI enabled us to directly compare our aging results against an earlier
study investigating the relationship between white matter integrity and STAI scores in younger
adults; second, we were interested in determining how patterns of age-related white matter
decline relate to the decreases in trait anxiety which may occur in healthy aging. Compared with
younger adults, healthy older adults tend to exhibit a positivity effect in which they allocate
mental resources away from aversive, anxiety-provoking stimuli in favor of positive stimuli

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

25

(Isaacowitz et al., 2006; Knight et al., 2007; Mather and Carstensen, 2003). These findings raise
the question of whether normal age-related decreases in attention to and memory for negative
information might in part be related to underlying changes in the circuitry associated with threatrelated processing biases (for a discussion of related issues, see Nashiro et al., 2012). Supporting
this view, one study demonstrated that a positivity effect in healthy older adults’ attention was
moderated by trait anxiety, with high-anxiety individuals initially avoiding but subsequently
prolonging their attention to negative words (Lee and Knight, 2009). This prolonged threat
processing among those with higher anxiety is consistent with our findings showing that
individuals with relatively intact amygdala-vPFC connections – including more medial
connections previously implicated in sustained anxious states (Davis et al., 2009b) - also
exhibited higher trait anxiety.
Conclusion
To test the current amygdala-vPFC regulatory model of anxiety, we examined a group of
individuals in which we expected reduced amygdala-vPFC structural integrity. Contrary to the
regulatory model, we found that age-related structural decline in amygdala-vPFC connections
was instead associated with a decrease in trait anxiety. Furthermore, we observed a significant
positive association between trait anxiety and amygdala-vPFC FA. Given previously mixed
findings regarding the relationship between anxiety and amygdala-vPFC structural integrity, our
findings emphasize the need for caution when interpreting the structural basis of normal and
pathological instances of anxiety. Whereas the regulatory model is useful for conceptualizing
interactions between the amygdala and vPFC, it is also possible that more efficient
communication between these regions supports amplified, rather than suppressed, anxiety and
stress-related responses. In light of our aging results, this raises the possibility that structural

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

26

decline in amygdala-based circuits instead relates to better anxiety outcomes in older adults.
Exploring this structure-function relationship in more detail will provide a more comprehensive
understanding of anxiety circuitry in both research and clinical settings.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

27

References
Allen, J. S., Bruss, J., Brown, C. K., & Damasio, H. (2005). Normal neuroanatomical variation
due to age: the major lobes and a parcellation of the temporal region. Neurobiology of
aging, 26(9), 1245-1260.
Alvarez, R. P., Chen, G., Bodurka, J., Kaplan, R., & Grillon, C. (2011). Phasic and sustained fear
in humans elicits distinct patterns of brain activity. Neuroimage, 55(1), 389-400.
Bach, D. R., Behrens, T. E., Garrido, L., Weiskopf, N., & Dolan, R.J. (2011). Deep and
superficial amygdala nuclei projections revealed in vivo by probabilistic tractography.
Journal of Neuroscience, 31(2), 618-623.
Ball, T.M., Sullivan, S., Flagan, T., Hitchcock, C.A., Simmons, A., Paulus, M.P., & Stein, M.B.
(2012). Selective effects of social anxiety, anxiety sensitivity, and negative affectivity on
the neural bases of emotional face processing. NeuroImage, 59(2), 1879-1887.
Banks, S.J., Eddy, K.T., Angstadt, M., Nathan, P.J., & Phan, K.L. (2007). Amygdala-frontal
connectivity during emotion regulation. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience,
2(4), 303–312.
Bartzokis, G., Lu, P.H., Heydari, P., Couvrette, A., Lee, G.J., Kalashyan, G., … Altshuler, L.L.
(2012). Multimodal magnetic resonance imaging assessment of white matter aging
trajectories over the lifespan of healthy individuals. Biological Psychiatry, 72(12), 1026–
1034.
Baur, V., Hänggi, J., & Jäncke, L. (2012). Volumetric associations between uncinate fasciculus,
amygdala, and trait anxiety. BMC Neuroscience, 13(4), 1-8.
Baur, V., Hänggi, J., Langer, N., & Jäncke, L. (2013). Resting-state functional and structural
connectivity within an insula-amygdala route specifically index state and trait anxiety.
Biological Psychiatry, 73(1), 85–92.
Beck, A.T., Ward, C.H., & Mendelson, M.D., J. Mock, M.D., J. Erbaugh, M.D. (1961). An
inventory for measuring depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 4(6), 561–571.
Beekman, A.T.F., Bremmer, M.A., Deeg, D.J.H., van Bolkom, A.J.L.M., Smit, J.H., De Beurs,
E., … van Tilburg, W. (1998). Anxiety disorders in later life: A report from the
Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13,
717-726.
Behrens, T. E. J., Berg, H. J., Jbabdi, S., Rushworth, M. F. S., & Woolrich, M. W. (2007).
Probabilistic diffusion tractography with multiple fibre orientations: What can we
gain?. Neuroimage, 34(1), 144-155.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

28

Beaulieu, C. (2002). The basis of anisotropic water diffusion in the nervous system—A technical
review. NMR Biomed 15: 435–455.
Bennett, I. J., Madden, D. J., Vaidya, C. J., Howard, D. V., & Howard, J. H. (2010). Age‐related
differences in multiple measures of white matter integrity: A diffusion tensor imaging
study of healthy aging. Human brain mapping, 31(3), 378-390.
Bijanki, K. R., Stillman, A. N., Arndt, S., Magnotta, V. A., Fiedorowicz, J. G., Haynes, W. G., ...
& Moser, D. J. (2013). White matter fractional anisotropy is inversely related to anxious
symptoms in older adults with atherosclerosis. International journal of geriatric
psychiatry.
Bishop, S., Duncan, J., Brett, M., & Lawrence, A.D. (2004). Prefrontal cortical function and
anxiety: controlling attention to threat-related stimuli. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 184-188.
Bishop, S. J. (2007). Neurocognitive mechanisms of anxiety: An integrative account. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 11(7), 307–316.
Bishop, S. J. (2008). Trait anxiety and impoverished prefrontal control of attention. Nature
neuroscience, 12(1), 92-98.
Bracht, T., Tüscher, O., Schnell, S., Kreher, B., Rüsch, N., Glauche, V., … Saur, D. (2009).
Extraction of prefronto-amygdalar pathways by combining probability maps. Psychiatry
Research: Neuroimaging, 174(3), 217–222.
Burzynska, A.Z., Preuschhof, C., Bäckman, L., Nyberg, L., Li, S.C., Lindenberger, U., &
Heekeren, H. R. (2010). Age-related differences in white matter microstructure: Regionspecific patterns of diffusivity. NeuroImage, 49(3), 2104–2112.
Cerqueira, J. J., Almeida, O. F., & Sousa, N. (2008). The stressed prefrontal cortex. Left? Right!.
Brain Behavior and Immunity, 22(5), 630-638.
Chang, C., & Glover, G. H. (2009). Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on
default mode network anti-correlations and correlations. Neuroimage, 47(4), 1448.
Charles, S. T., Mather, M., & Carstensen, L. L. (2003). Aging and emotional memory: the
forgettable nature of negative images for older adults. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 132(2), 310.
Cisler, J.M., Olatunji, B.O., Feldner, M.T., & Forsyth, J.P. (2009). Emotion regulation and the
anxiety disorders: An integrative review. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 32(1), 68-82.
Croxson, P.L., Johansen-Berg, H., Behrens, T.E.J., Robson, M.D., Pinsk, M.A., Gross, C.G., …
Rushworth, M.F.S. (2005). Quantitative investigation of connections of the prefrontal

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

29

cortex in the human and macaque using probabilistic diffusion tractography. Journal of
Neuroscience, 25(39), 8854–8866.
Damasio, A.R., Tranel, D., & Damasio, H. (1990). Individuals with sociopathic behavior caused
by frontal damage fail to respond autonomically to social stimuli. Behavioral Brain
Research, 41(2), 81-94.
Davis, S. W., Dennis, N. A., Buchler, N. G., White, L. E., Madden, D. J., & Cabeza, R. (2009a).
Assessing the effects of age on long white matter tracts using diffusion tensor
tractography. Neuroimage, 46(2), 530-541.
Davis, M., Walker, D. L., Miles, L., & Grillon, C. (2009b). Phasic vs sustained fear in rats and
humans: role of the extended amygdala in fear vs anxiety. Neuropsychopharmacology,
35(1), 105-135.
Dickie, E. W., & Armony, J. L. (2008). Amygdala responses to unattended fearful faces:
Interaction between sex and trait anxiety. Psychiatry research, 162(1), 51.
Dolcos, F., Iordan, A. D., & Dolcos, S. Neural correlates of emotion-cognition interactions: A
review of evidence from brain imaging investigations. Journal of Cognitive Psychology,
23(6), 669-694.
Endler, N.S., & Kocovski, N.L. (2001). State and trait anxiety revisited. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 15(3), 231–245.
Endler, N.S., Cox, B.J., Parker, J.D., & Bagby, R.M. (1992). Self-reports of depression and statetrait anxiety: Evidence for differential assessment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 63(5), 832–838.
Flint, A.J. (1994). Epidemiology and comorbidity of anxiety disorders in the elderly. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151(5), 640-649.
Fox, A. S., Shelton, S. E., Oakes, T. R., Davidson, R. J., & Kalin, N. H. (2008). Trait-like brain
activity during adolescence predicts anxious temperament in primates. PloS one, 3(7),
e2570.
Ghashghaei, H.T. & Barbas, H. (2002). Pathways for emotion: Interactions of prefrontal and
anterior temporal pathways in the amygdala of the rhesus monkey. Neuroscience, 115(4),
1261-1279.
Ghashghaei, H.T., Hilgetag, C.C., & Barbas, H. (2007). Sequence of information processing for
emotions based on the anatomic dialogue between prefrontal cortex and amygdala.
NeuroImage, 34(3), 905–923.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

30

Glenn, O. A., Henry, R. G., Berman, J. I., Chang, P. C., Miller, S. P., Vigneron, D. B., &
Barkovich, A. J. (2003). DTI‐based three‐dimensional tractography detects differences
in the pyramidal tracts of infants and children with congenital hemiparesis. Journal of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 18(6), 641-648.
Hariri, A.R., Bookheimer, S.Y., & Mazziotta, J.C. (2000). Modulating emotional responses:
effects of a neocortical network on the limbic system. NeuroReport, 11(1), 43-48.
Hare, T.A, Tottenham, N., Galvan, A., Voss, H.U., Glover, G.H., & Casey, B.J. (2008).
Biological substrates of emotional reactivity and regulation in adolescence during an
emotional go-nogo task. Biological Psychiatry, 63(10), 927–934.
Hartley, C.A. & Phelps, E.A. (2010). Changing fear: The neural circuitry of emotion regulation.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 35(1), 136-146.
Head, D., Bucker, R.L., Shimony, J.S., Williams, L.E., Akbudak, E., Conturo, T.E., … Snyder,
A.Z. (2004). Differential vulnerability of anterior white matter in nondemented aging
with minimal acceleration in dementia of the Alzheimer type: Evidence from diffusion
tensor imaging. Cerebral Cortex, 14(4), 14410-14423.
Heinz, A., Braus, D. F., Smolka, M. N., Wrase, J., Puls, I., Hermann, D., ... & Büchel, C. (2004).
Amygdala-prefrontal coupling depends on a genetic variation of the serotonin transporter.
Nature neuroscience, 8(1), 20-21.
Herman, J. P., Ostrander, M. M., Mueller, N. K., & Figueiredo, H. (2005). Limbic system
mechanisms of stress regulation: hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical axis. Progress in
Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 29(8), 1201-1213.
Hughes, E. J., Bond, J., Svrckova, P., Makropoulos, A., Ball, G., Sharp, D. J., ... Counsell, S. J.
(2012). Regional changes in thalamic shape and volume with increasing age.
Neuroimage, 63(3), 1134-1142.
Isaacowitz, D. M., Wadlinger, H. A., Goren, D., & Wilson, H. R. (2006). Selective preference in
visual fixation away from negative images in old age? An eye tracking study. Psychology
and Aging, 21, 40-48.
Johansen-Berg, H., Gutman, D. A., Behrens, T. E. J., Matthews, P. M., Rushworth, M. F. S.,
Katz, E., ... & Mayberg, H. S. (2008). Anatomical connectivity of the subgenual cingulate
region targeted with deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Cerebral
Cortex, 18(6), 1374-1383.
Johansen-Berg, H., Behrens, T. E. J. (2009). Diffusion MRI: From quantitative measurement to
in-vivo neuroanatomy. Academic Press.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

31

Kapp, B.S., Supple, W.F., & Whalen, P.J. (1994). Effects of electrical stimulation of the
amygdaloid central nucleus on neocortical arousal in the rabbit. Behavioral Neuroscience,
108(1), 81-93.
Kim, M. J., & Whalen, P. J. (2009). The structural integrity of an amygdala-prefrontal pathway
predicts trait anxiety. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(37), 11614–11618.
Kim, M. J., Loucks, R. A., Palmer, A. L., Brown, A. C., Solomon, K. M., Merchante, A. N., &
Whalen, P. J. (2011a). The structural and functional connectivity of the amygdala: From
normal to pathological anxiety. Behavioural Brain Research, 223(2), 403-410.
Kim, M. J., Gee, D. G., Loucks, R. A., Davis, F. C., & Whalen, P. J. (2011b). Anxiety
dissociates dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex functional connectivity with the
amygdala at rest. Cerebral Cortex, 21(7), 1667–1673.
Knight, M., Seymour, T. L., Gaunt, J. T., Baker, C., Nesmith, K., & Mather, M. (2007). Aging
and goal-directed emotional attention: Distraction reverses emotional biases. Emotion, 7(4),
705-714.
Kvaal, K., Laake, K. & Endegal., K. (2001). Psychometric properties of the state part of the
Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) in geriatric patients. International Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(10), 980-986.
Leach, L. S., Christensen, H., Mackinnon, A. J., Windsor, T. D., & Butterworth, P. (2008).
Gender differences in depression and anxiety across the adult lifespan: the role of
psychosocial mediators. Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 43(12), 983-998.
Lee, L. O., & Knight, B. G. (2009). Attentional bias for threat in older adults: moderation of the
positivity bias by trait anxiety and stimulus modality. Psychology and aging, 24(3), 741.
Liao, W., Qiu, C., Gentili, C., Walter, M., Pan, Z., Ding, J., ... & Chen, H. (2010). Altered
effective connectivity network of the amygdala in social anxiety disorder: a resting-state
FMRI study. PLoS One, 5(12), e15238.
Lindesay, J., Briggs, K. & Murphy, E. (1989). The Guy’s/Age Concern survey. Prevalence rates
of cognitive impairment in depression and anxiety in an urban elderly community. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 155(3), 317-329.
Lochner, C. L., Fouche, J., du Plessis, S., Spottiswoode, B., Soraya, S., Fineberg, N., …, Stein,
D. J. (2012). Evidence for fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity white matter
abnormalities in the internal capsule and cingulum in patients with obsessive compulsive
disorder. Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience, 37(3), 193-199.
Lueck, M. D. (2007). Anxiety levels: Do they influence the perception of time? UW-L Journal of
Undergraduate Research, 10, 1-4.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

32

Madden, D. J., Bennett, I. J., & Song, A.W. (2009). Cerebral white matter integrity and cognitive
aging: contributions from diffusion tensor imaging. Neuropsychology Review, 19, 415-435.
Malykhin, N., Vahidy, S., Michielse, S., Coupland, N., Camicioli, R., Seres, P., & Carter, R.
(2011). Structural organization of the prefrontal white matter pathways in the adult and
aging brain measured by diffusion tensor imaging. Brain Structure & Function, 216(4),
417–431.
Mather, M., & Carstensen, L. L. (2003). Aging and attentional biases for emotional faces.
Psychological Science, 14(5), 409-415.
Mather, M., Lighthall, N. R., Nga, L., & Gorlick, M. A. (2010). Sex differences in how stress
affects brain activity during face viewing. NeuroReport, 21, 933-937.
Mathews, A., & MacLeod, C. (2002). Induced processing biases have causal effects on anxiety.
Cognition & Emotion, 16(3), 331-354.
Milad, M. R., & Quirk, G. J. (2002). Neurons in medial prefrontal cortex signal memory
for fear extinction. Nature, 420, 70–74.
Milad, M. R., Rauch, S. L., Pitman, R. K., & Quirk, G. J. (2006). Fear extinction in rats:
Implications for human brain imaging and anxiety disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 73(1),
61-71.
Modi, S., Trivedi, R., Singh, K., Kumar, P., Rathore, R. K. S., Tripathi, R. P., & Khushu, S.
(2013). Individual differences in trait anxiety are associated with white matter integrity in
fornix and uncinate fasciculus: Preliminary evidence from a DTI based tractography study.
Behavioral Brain Research 238, 188-192.
Montag, C., Reuter, M., Weber, B., Marketta, S., Schoene-bake, J-C. (2012). Individual
differences in trait anxiety are associated with white matter tract integrity in the left
temporal lobe in healthy males but not females. Neuroscience 217, 77-83.
Myers-Schulz & Koenigs (2012). Functional anatomy of ventromedial prefrontal cortex:
implications for mood and anxiety disorders. Molecular Psychiatry, 17(2), 132-141.
Nashiro, K., Sakaki, M., & Mather, M. (2012). Age differences in brain activity during emotion
processing: Reflections of age-related decline or increased emotion regulation?
Gerontology, (58), 156-163.
Oler, J. A., Fox, A. S., Shelton, S. E., Christian, B. T., Murali, D., Oakes, T.R., … Kalin, N.H.
(2009). Serotonin transporter availability in the amygdala and bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis predicts anxious temperament and brain glucose metabolic activity. Journal of
Neuroscience, 29(32), 9961-9966.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

33

Papagno, C. (2011). Naming and the role of the uncinate fasciculus in language function.
Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports, 11(6), 553-559.
Pessoa, L. & Adolphs, R. (2010). Emotion processing and the amygdala: From a ‘low road’ to
‘many roads’ of evaluating biological significance. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 773782.
Pezawas, L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Drabant, E.M., Verchinski, B.A., Munoz, K.E., Kolachana,
B.S., … Weinberger, D.R. (2005). 5-HTTLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulateamygdala interactions: a genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression. Nature
Neuroscience, 8(6), 828–834.
Phan, K.L., Orlichenko, A., Boyd, E., Angstadt, M., Coccaro, E.F., Liberzon, I., Arfanakis, K.
(2009). Preliminary evidence of white matter abnormality in the uncinate fasciculus in
generalized social anxiety disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 66(7), 691-694.
Phelps, E.A., Delgado, M.R., Nearing, K.I., & LeDoux, J.E. (2004). Extinction learning in
humans: Role of the amygdala and vmPFC. Neuron, 43(6), 897-905.
Phillips, M. L., Drevets, W. C., Rauch, S. L., & Lane, R. (2003). Neurobiology of emotion
perception II: Implications for major psychiatric disorders. Biological psychiatry, 54(5),
515-528.
Regier, D.A., Narrow, W.E., & Rae, D.S. (1990). The epidemiology of anxiety disorders: The
epidemiologic catchment area (ECA) experience. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 24, 3-14.
Rosso, I.M., Makris, N., Britton, J.C., Price, L.M., Gold, A.L., Zai, … Rauch, S.L. (2010).
Anxiety sensitivity correlates with two indices of right anterior insula structure in specific
animal phobia. Depression and Anxiety, 27(12), 1104–1110.
Salat, D. H., Greve, D. N., Pacheco, J. L., Quinn, B. T., Helmer, K. G., Buckner, R. L., & Fischl,
B. (2009). Regional white matter volume differences in nondemented aging and
Alzheimer’s disease. NeuroImage, 44(4), 1247–1258.
Saygin, Z. M., Osher, D. E., Augustinack, J., Fischl, B., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2011).
Connectivity-based segmentation of human amygdala nuclei using probabilistic
tractography. NeuroImage, 56(3), 1353-1361.
Shattuck D. W., Mirza, M., Adisetiyo, V., Hojatkashani, C., Salamon, G., Narr, K. L., … Toga,
A. W. (2007). Construction of a 3D probabilistic atlas of human cortical structures.
NeuroImage, 39(3), 1064-1080.
Schmierer, K., Scaravilli, F., Altmann, D. R., Barker, G. J., & Miller, D. H. (2004).
Magnetization transfer ratio and myelin in postmortem multiple sclerosis brain. Annals of
neurology, 56(3), 407-415.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

34

Simpson Jr., J.R., Drevets, W.C., Snyder, A.Z., Gusnard, D.A., & Raichle, M.E. (2001).
Emotion-induced changes in human medial prefrontal cortex: II. During anticipatory
anxiety. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
98(2), 688-693.
Spielberger, C.D., Gorsuch, R.L., Lushene, R.E., Vagg, P.R., & Jacobs, G.A. (1983). Manual for
the state-trait anxiety inventory STAI (Form Y). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
Press.
Stein, J.L., Wiedholz, L.M., Bassett, D.S., Weinberger, D.R., Zink, C.F., Mattay, V.S., & MeyerLindenberg, A. (2007a). A validated network of effective amygdala connectivity.
NeuroImage, 36(3), 736-745.
Stein, M., Simmons, A., Feinstein, J., & Paulus, M. (2007b). Increased amygdala and insula
activation during emotion processing in anxiety-prone subjects. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164(2), 318-327.
Stillman, A. N., Rowe, K. C., Arndt, S., & Moser, D. J. (2012). Anxious symptoms and cognitive
function in non‐demented older adults: an inverse relationship. International journal of
geriatric psychiatry, 27(8), 792-798.
Wager, T. D., Davidson, M. L., Hughes, B. L., Lindquist, M. A., & Ochsner, K. N. (2008).
Prefrontal-subcortical pathways mediating successful emotion regulation. Neuron, 59(6),
1037-1050.
Walker, D. L., & Davis, M. (2008). Role of the extended amygdala in short-duration versus
sustained fear: a tribute to Dr. Lennart Heimer. Brain Structure and Function, 213(1-2), 2942.
Whalen, P.J. (1998). Fear, vigilance, and ambiguity: Initial neuroimaging studies of the human
amygdala. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7(6), 177-188.
Wilcox, R. R. (2004). Some results on extensions and modifications of the Theil-Sen estimator.
British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 57, 265—280.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

Table 1
Participant characteristics
Age Group
Mage
Age Range
N Males Females
BDI
Trait Anxiety
YA
23(2.66)
19 – 29
21
13
8
3.38(3.91)
34.1(9.82)
MA
44(3.24)
40 – 50
18
11
7
3.67(5.86) 35.11(5.86)
OA
71(8.12)
60 – 85
15
6
9
3.93(3.71) 28.33(6.97)
Notes: YA = younger adults; MA = middle-aged adults; OA = older adults; BDI = Beck’s
Depression Inventory (Beck et al., 1961); Trait Anxiety was assessed by State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory (STAI; Spielberger et al., 1983). Standard deviations are displayed in parentheses.

35

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

36

Figure 1. The processing pipeline used to create the anatomical masks for tractography. The
amygdala masks were hand-drawn on each participant’s high-resolution T1-weighted structural
image by trained researchers. Each participant’s thalamus “stop” masks were segmented from
their T1-weighted structural image. The ventral prefrontal cortex (vPFC) masks were created by
merging each participant’s probabilistic grey-matter mask (thresholded at 35%) with the MNIspace-defined vPFC mask, which had been dilated to encapsulate white matter streamlines
passing near the cortical boundary (Bach et al., 2011).

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

37

Figure 2. Comparison of the topography of the amygdala-vPFC pathway and uncinate fasciculus.
The 3D rendering depicts the mean amygdala-vPFC pathway produced by probabilistic
tractography (green) and the uncincate fasiculus (orange) acquired from the JHU White-Matter
Tractography Atlas. For illustrative purposes, the tractography pathway was thresholded at 20%
of the 54 participants and the uncinate fasciculus was thresholded at 10%. The tractography
results revealed white matter pathways consistent with the underlying anatomy.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

38

Figure 3. Amygdala-vPFC probability maps. Voxels within the amygdala-vPFC pathway are
color-coded based on the percentage of participants in whom they appeared. The pathway in
each brain slice is thresholded to reflect voxels that were present in 25-75% of participants in the
entire group.

Running head: TRAIT ANXIETY & AMYGDALA STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY

39

Figure 4. Comparison of mean amygdala-vPFC (A) fractional anisotropy, (B) tract volume, (C)
axial diffusivity and (D) radial diffusivity across age groups by hemisphere. Bars represent the
standard errors of the means. YA = younger adults, MA = middle-aged adults, OA = older
adults. Note that the mean white matter estimates on the Y-axis do not start at zero.

