Quantification of the alteration in the Resting State Networks for measuring brain
pathologies and diseases
Ibai Díez1,2, Asier Erramuzpe1,2, Sebastiano Stramaglia1,3,4 and Jesus M Cortes1,2,4,*
1. Computational Neuroimaging Lab. Biocruces Health Research Institute. Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo,
Spain
2. Quantitative Biomedicine Unit. Biocruces Health Research Institute. Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo,
Spain
3. Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit degli Studi di Bari and INFN, Bari, Italy
4. Ikerbasque, The Basque Foundation for Science. Bilbao, Spain
*Correspondence to jesus.cortesdiaz@osakidetza.net
Keywords: Resting State; Probabilistic Independent Component Analysis; Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging; BOLD Signal;
Abbreviations: RSN (Resting State Network); PICA (Probabilistic Independent Component Analysis); BOLD (BloodOxygen-Level-Dependent); fMRI (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging); rs (resting state);

Brief summary:
Resting State Networks (RSNs) are the result from the coherence across brain
regions in the high-amplitude ultra-slow (0.1 Hz) fluctuations in the Blood-OxygenLevel-Dependent (BOLD) signal acquired with resting state functional magnetic
resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) [1,2]. The RSNs are universal, meaning that, beyond
individual brain differences, they emerge at rest in all healthy subjects. This universal
behavior in healthy brains has pushed forward the strategy for quantification of the
RSNs alterations in brain pathological conditions to find for new neuroimaging
markers for both mental and cognitive disorders. Indeed, alterations in the RSNs
have been found in patients with deficit of consciousness after brain traumatic injury
[3-5], in Alzheimer disease [6] and schizophrenia [7,8]. Based on these results, it is
expected that RSNs alterations occur as well for other brain disorders and diseases.
This is the main motivation of this project, given an input rs-fMRI data of a specific
patient, to develop new and efficient methods capable to quantify the precise
amount of alteration (respect to control) for each of the resting networks.
Technical details:
Since a signal processing point of view, the RSNs are corresponding with the
different spatial components obtained by Independent Component Analysis (ICA) of
the rs-fMRI time-series. Thus, given an input matrix of rs-fMRI with dimensions time
points * voxels number, after ICA we get two matrices, one with dimensions time
points * components number and other with dimensions components number *
voxels number. A big technical problem is the very large dimensionality in the rsfMRI data (a whole-brain division of about 105-106 voxels number); thus to apply ICA
one needs first to reduce dimensionality via Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or
alternative methods. In concrete, we are suggesting here to apply the Probabilistic
Independet Component Analysis (PICA) method for rs-fMRI [9], plugged-into the
popular neuroimaing software FSL [10].
In [2], they apply PICA to get 8 different components or RSNs, all having a
corresponding cognitive function: the medial visual, the lateral visual, the auditory,

the sensory-motor, the default mode, the executive control, the dorsal visual right
and the dorsal visual left. In this project, we will study these same 8 components.
The control rs-fMRI data will be obtained from the 1000 Functional Connectomes
Project [11], in which there are available rs-fMRI data from healthy subjects. This will
allow for the construction of spatial templates corresponding to the healthy RSNs
[12], as well as to evaluate the dispersion of RSNs around the template RSNs in the
population of healthy subjects, evaluated in terms of the distribution of the spatial
correlation coefficient between the RSN of each healthy subject and the
corresponding template.
At the second stage, we will make use of the database from Alzheimer Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), in which there are available rs-fMRI data belonging
to AD patients [12] at different disease stage (from very early to mild cognitive
impairment to AD). For a quantification of the RSNs alteration in the brain pathology,
we will calculate the spatial correlation between the RSNs in patients and the
healthy RSNs templates, to eventually assess to what extent the RSNs alteration
might be correlated with the behavioral index of the disease (eg., one of the clinical
assessments provided by ADNI is the ADAS test score, quantifying the seriousness of
the pathology at the cognitive level).
The expected output of the project is a software that, given the input data of the rsfMRI of a specific patient [14], return a number indicating the alteration level for
each of the different 8 components, ie., the spatial correlation between each RSN of
that specific patient and its corresponding RSN template.
Finally, a possible extension of this project might be to construct a regression
machine to predict the stage of the disease from the rs-fMRI input data, previously
trained to make predictions based on the 8 values of the spatial correlations of RSNs.
Required Experience:
Courses on Biomedical Engineering at MSc Level.
References:
[1] Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA and Shulman GL.
A default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 676-682, 2001
[2] Beckmann CF, DeLuca M, Devlin JT and Smith SM. Investigations into resting-state connectivity
using independent component analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 360: 1001-1013, 2005
[3] Boveroux P, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Bruno MA, Noirhomme Q, Lauwick S, Luxen A, Degueldre C,
Plenevaux A, Schnakers C, Phillips C, Brichant JF, Bonhomme V, Maquet P, Greicius MD, Laureys S and
Boly M. Breakdown of within- and between-network resting state functional magnetic resonance
imaging connectivity during propofol-induced loss of consciousness. Anesthesiology 113: 1038-1053,
2010
[4] Noirhomme Q, Soddu A, Lehembre R, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Boveroux P, Boly M and Laureys S. Brain
connectivity in pathological and pharmacological coma. Front Syst Neurosci 4:160, 2010
[5] Mäki-Marttunen V, Diez I, Cortes JM, Chialvo DR and Villarreal M. Disruption of transfer
entropy and inter-hemispheric brain functional connectivity in patients with disorder of
consciousness. Front Neuroinform 7:24, 2013

[6] Rombouts SA, Barkhof F, Goekoop R, Stam CJ and Scheltens P. Altered resting state networks
in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study. Hum Brain Mapp
26:231-239, 2005
[7] Woodward ND, Rogers B and Heckers S. Functional resting-state networks are differentially
affected in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 130: 86-93, 2011
[8] Karbasforoushan H and Woodward ND. Resting-state networks in schizophrenia. Curr Top
Med Chem 12:2404-2414, 2012
[9] Beckmann CF and Smith SM. Probabilistic independent component analysis for functional
magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 23:137-152, 2004
[10] http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/MELODIC
[11] http://www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/
[12] The precise method to obtain each of 8 different components is first to use the template
obtained in [2] to then apply spatial regression to obtain each of these components. Once
detected the desired component, we can compute the correlations between all the voxels time
series and the chosen component to estimate how much each voxel is correlated with that
component.
[13] http://adni.loni.usc.edu/data-samples/
[14] The student will get support from the Computational Neuroimaging Group in Biocruces for
preprocessing the input data, including motion correction, slice-time correction, brain
extraction, smoothing, intensity normalization, band pass filter, detrend, transformation between
structural and functional information, regress out white matter/cerebrospinal fluid/global
signal/head motion, transform fMRI into MNI space, etc.

