Ghent University
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences
Second Master Theoretical and Experimental Psychology
Year: 2014-2015
Second semester exam period

MAPPING BRAIN NETWORKS AND THEIR DYSFUNCTION IN AUTISM: A
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ANALYSIS
Laure Dombrecht
Student number: 01000280

Masterproef II
Promoter: Daniele Marinazzo
Mentor: Roma Siugzdaite
Department: Data-Analysis
19-05-2015

1	  
	  

Foreword
This master thesis was written as a completion to the Master of Science in
Psychology: theoretical and experimental psychology. Working on this master thesis for
two years has been both exciting and interesting. I learned a lot about Autism and
resting-state fMRI analysis, and about my own future goals and research interests.
Overall I am very grateful to all the people that have supported me throughout this
project, without whom this would not have been possible.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my mentor Roma Siugzdaite for guiding me
through the entire process, teaching me the ropes of resting-state fMRI analysis and
being available for brainstorming through both years of my master thesis.
Additionally I want to thank my mother Christel Snauwaert for assistance in
constructing all fMRI images of this master thesis in Photoshop.
Furthermore, I would like to thank my promoter Daniele Marinazzo for setting up
this interesting research topic and assisting me in shaping the actual research question.
I would also like to thank my parents, Paul Dombrecht and Christel Snauwaert, for
providing me with the best opportunities in life, pushing me to be the best that I can be,
supporting my hopes and dreams and providing both emotional and financial support
throughout my entire education. Without their guidance in both good and stressful
times, I would not be the person that I am today.
And last but not least, I would like to thank my friends and peers for their support,
for being someone to bounce ideas off of and discuss further options, and for being a
shoulder to cry on in times when stress gets the best of me.

Laure,
April 30th, 2015.

2	  
	  

Abstract
Neural connectivity could be a possible explanatory framework for autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). ASD is a common developmental disorder that is characterized by
impaired social interaction, impaired communication, restricted interests, and repetitive
behaviors. Two seemingly contradictory connectivity theories about etiology of ASD,
namely the underconnectivity theory and the hyperconnectivity theory, could possibly
be integrated in a more mixed and nuanced perspective. In the current study the publicly
available dataset ABIDE is used to investigate the functional and structural connectivity
patterns of young children (< 12 years old) with severe and mild ASD compared to
matched controls. Independent Component Analysis (ICA) of functional data revealed
within-network hyperconnectivity between the dorsal DMN and the left anterior insula
as a possible biomarker for milder forms of autism, and within-network
hypoconnectivity of the auditory network with the right superior parietal lobule as
possible indication for more severe forms of autism. Additionally, Source-Based
Morphometry (SBM) revealed structural abnormalities in a gray-matter network that
consists mainly of left frontal areas with connections to the temporal and parietal lobe in
both severity groups compared to healthy controls. Whilst our findings in functional
connectivity could be used to differentiate between mild and severe forms of autism,
our findings in structural connectivity point towards a more unified abnormality that is
consistent across all degrees of ASD severity.

3	  
	  

Table of Content
Foreword …………………………………………………………………………….. 1
Abstract ……………………………………………………………………………… 2
Table of Content …………………………………………………………………….. 3
Introduction …………………………………………………………………………. 5
Current Study ………………………………………………………………………. 11
Method ……………………………………………………………………………….12
Participants ……………………………………………………………………..12
Preprocessing ………………………………………………………………….. 13
Preprocessing of anatomical data ……………………………………….. 13
Preprocessing of functional data ………………………………………....13
Postprocessing ………………………………………………………………….15
Independent component analysis of functional data ……………………..15
Source-based Morphometry analysis of anatomical data ……………….. 15
Results ………………………………………………………………………………. 16
Group analysis of functional data ……………………………………………... 16
Group analysis of anatomical data …………………………………………….. 17
Discussion …………………………………………………………………………… 18
Functional connectivity ………………………………………………………...19
Structural connectivity ………………………………………………………… 21
Conclusion …………………………………………………………………………... 23
Limitations of the study …………………………………………………………….24
Nederlandstalige Samenvatting …………………………………………………….25
References …………………………………………………………………………... 26
Appendix 1 ………………………………………………………………………….. 36
Appendix 2 ………………………………………………………………………….. 40

4	  
	  

Appendix 3 ………………………………………………………………………….. 42
Appendix 4 ………………………………………………………………………….. 43

5	  
	  

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is clinically described as a ‘triad’ of several
deficits: impaired social interaction, impaired communication, restricted interests, and
repetitive behaviors (Belmonte et al., 2004). In eight-year-old children it has a
prevalence of 1 in 88 (Baio, 2012). Geschwind and Levitt (2007) described ASD as a
very broad syndrome instead of just one single disorder that is why they referred to it as
‘the autisms’. The autism spectrum includes Asperger’s syndrome, Pervasive
Developmental Disorder-Not Otherwise Specified, Rett’s disorder and Childhood
Disintegrative Disorder. The diagnosis of autism is made when six symptoms are
present over the domain of the triad: impairment of social interaction, communication
and repetitive behavior, interests and activities (Gotham, Bishop & Lord, 2011).
Impairment of social interaction includes a lack of spontaneous seeking to share with
others and a lack of social or emotional reciprocity. Impairment of communication
(verbal and nonverbal) includes using stereotyped, repetitive language and difficulty in
initiating or sustaining a conversation with others. The restricted, repetitive behavior
involves inflexibility and sticking to (non-functional) routines or rituals (MacKenzie,
2008).
Abnormal neural connectivity can be used as an explanatory framework for the many
faces of ASD (Belmonte et al., 2004). ASD was considered to be a ‘developmental
disconnection syndrome’ (Geschwind and Levitt, 2007). Therefore recent research on
etiology of ASD focusses on discovering neurological connectivity biomarkers that can
serve as a diagnostic tool that indicates ASD. Consequently investigating brain
connectivity in autism can help in understanding and treating children and adults with
ASD.
Brain connectivity consists of anatomical connectivity or structural connectivity,
functional connectivity and effective connectivity. In structural connectivity, anatomical
patterns of units in a nervous system are investigated where in functional connectivity
statistical dependencies between signals in different regions are calculated (like crosscorrelations or coherence). Causal interactions are investigated within effective
connectivity research (Sporns, 2007). In order to understand human functioning you
need to know the elements and interconnections of the networks in the brain. A
comprehensive understanding of the structural connections in combination with

6	  
	  

functional connectivity lies at the base of increased insight in how functional brain
states emerge (Sporns et al., 2005). Various types of neuroimaging techniques have
indicated associations between major psychiatric disorders and abnormalities of brain
function and brain structure (Savitz et al., 2013). A lot of psychiatric disorders (like
depression, schizophrenia and autism) are known to have abnormal functioning of the
default mode network (DMN), which is one of the networks that are found to be
correlated and more active during rest. During rest the mind is free to wander. The
DMN is associated to self-referential mental activity, stimulus-independent thought,
monitoring somesthesic and vegetative information, inner speech, planning of future
activities,

creativity,

self-awareness

etc.

(Callard

and

Margulies,

2014).

Neuropsychiatric disorders influence these important aspects of human experience; they
alter (or are caused by alteration of) DMN functioning (Whitfield-Gabrieli & Ford,
2012). This reveals the importance of resting-state fMRI in comprehension of
psychopathology.
Publicly available datasets of functional MRI scan sessions on patients with ASD
boost connectivity research in ASD. Earlier studies had often consisted of small sample
sizes, but datasets such as the ‘1000 functional connectome project’ (Biswal et al.,
2010) improved this shortcoming. The 1000 functional connectome project is freely
available at www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/ and consists mainly of data from
healthy subjects. The Human Connectome Project (HCP) is another publicly available
dataset that focusses on characterization of brain connectivity and function and their
variability in healthy adults (Van Essen et al., 2012). Other publically available datasets
are more focused on patients with certain types of pathology, examples are the ‘Autism
Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE)’ (Di Martino et al., 2013), the ‘Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)’ (Jack et al., 2008) and the ‘Collaborative
Informatics and Neuroimaging Suite (COINS)’. COINS (http://coins.mrn.org) consists
of data from over 300 studies which is over 19,000 MRI, MEG, and EEG scan sessions
together with more than 180,000 clinical assessments (Scott et al., 2011). The advantage
of this very large source of information is that the data can be reorganized and used for
many different problems and research questions. Second you can also take a lot of
covariates such as handedness, ASD severity, intelligence etc. into account while
analyzing your research questions.

7	  
	  

We often use phenotypic measures to determine the severity of autism features in
neuroscience. Two of the most commonly used measures are the Autism Diagnostic
Observation Schedule (ADOS) and the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R)
scales (Gotham et al., 2009). Their scores indicate that the patient had a higher number
of items that represent core deficits and/or greater severity. Both scales are often used as
an indication of severity, but the raw ADOS scores for example where not developed
for comparison across individuals or time, and the raw scores are not normalized (de
Bildt et al., 2011). So Gotham et al. developed a calibrated severity score for ADOS
based on percentiles of raw total scores of each ADOS diagnostic classification
(Gotham et al., 2009). Characteristic variables like chronological age and verbal IQ
have less influence on the calibrated severity scores than on the raw ADOS scores. That
is why we use these calibrated ADOS Gotham scores in our current research. The
severity scores have a 10-point metric, a score of 1-3 indicates a nonspectrum ADOS
classification, a score of 4-5 indicates an ASD classification and a score of 6-10
indicates an autism classification (Gotham et al., 2009; de Bildt et al., 2010).
One of the earliest indications of autism is macrocephaly (a head circumference
above the 97th percentile), a large head size that was still within the normal range was
even more common. This macrocephaly is not present at birth and there is no
relationship with autism severity (Lainhart et al., 1997). More specifically, overgrowth
in occipitofrontal circumference in children with ASD occurs during the second half of
the first year of life (Webb et al., 2007). Macrocephaly in primary school children with
autism (7-11 years old) is found to be a possible biomarker of abnormal neural
connectivity (White, O’Reilly and Frith, 2009). So macrocephaly in ASD is not
restricted to young infants. Other evidence that points out the role of network
dysfunctions in autism is the increased cerebral white matter volume and increased
cortical gray matter volume seen on structural MRI scans in very young children with
autism. These increases cannot be seen in older children with autism (Minshew and
Keller, 2010). These results support the developmental perspective of autism, which
will be discussed further on.
Support for the importance of looking at cortical neurons as the unit of dysfunction
in autism can also be found in the postmortem study of Courchesne et al. (2011) where

8	  
	  

a higher neuron count was found in the prefrontal cortex of children with autism
compared to controls. The excess in neurons was higher in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex than in the medial prefrontal cortex. A connection with clinical symptoms can be
found in the bilateral enlargement of the amygdala and the hippocampus in children
with ASD (Sparks et al., 2002). Since the amygdala is important for responses to
emotional stimuli, which for example is important for our interactions with others,
people with autism usually have more problems in understanding emotional
expressions. This could be a potential region of interest in our current study.
The findings of macrocephaly are inconsistent with the under-connectivity theories
of autism. A lot of studies reported a weaker functional connectivity between brain
areas during the execution of cognitive tasks in patients with ASD (Supekar et al.,
2013). This phenomenon of underconnectivity is found during language comprehension
tasks (Just et al., 2004), social processing (Koshino et al., 2008), visuospatial processing
(Damarla et al., 2010), viewing faces (Khan et al., 2013), high-level inhibition
(Solomon et al., 2009) and during many more task performances (for a review: Kana et
al., 2011). Since a balance between specialization and integration in the brain is critical
for functioning, this weaker functional connectivity could be a crucial cause for ASD.
This convergence of evidence lead to the “underconnectivity theory” proposed by Just
and colleagues (2012). The underconnectivity theory states that the disruption of interregional connective circuitry could lie at the origin of dysfunctions in autism. Especially
tasks that are particularly dependent on integration of frontal and more posterior cortical
regions are impaired (mostly more complex cognitive tasks). The focus of the theory
lies on reduced frontal-posterior synchronization of activation during cognitive tasks,
this causes an increase in reliance on posterior regions when frontal cortex involvement
is required (Just et al., 2012). But empirical evidence that was inconsistent with this
theory leads to a comparison study of Müller and colleagues (2011). Underconnectivity
is mainly a conclusion of task-driven research in specific regions of interest without the
use of low-pass filtering. Underconnectivity could thus be a result of specific
methodological choices.
Contrary to the underconnectivity theory, the hyperconnectivity theory relates
dysfunctions in ASD to patterns of hyperconnectivity in the brain. Findings of

9	  
	  

macrocephaly in humans in combination with hyperconnectivity in animal autism
models (Testa-Silva et al., 2012) were at the base of the hyperconnectivity theory. Di
Martino and colleagues (2011) tried to reconcile these findings with human
neuroimaging studies on ASD. They found excessive functional connectivity in the
striatal-cortical circuits. Supekar and colleagues (2013) examined functional
connectivity with a whole-brain analysis in a cohort study on school-age children (7-13
years old). Widespread functional brain hyperconnectivity was found at the whole-brain
level but also at the level of major functional networks (between both proximal and
distant anatomical regions).
These two seemingly contradictory theories might be reconcilable with a more
developmental perspective. Since a normal brain development shows a transition from
over-connectivity to pruning, which rewires the connectivity at neural and at system
level (evidence from resting state fMRI, Supekar et al., 2009) a similar or contradictory
development could also be possible in ASD. The contradictory results in whole-brain
functional connectivity in autism neuroimaging research could result from differences
between children and adults. Studies of children under the age of 12 find evidence for
the hyperconnectivity theory, studies based on data from adolescents and adults give an
indication of functional underconnectivity (Uddin, Supekar & Menon, 2013). From this
we can expect hyperconnectivity in our sample of ASD children under the age of 12.
Additionally, several studies have discovered mixed results when examining
functional connectivity in children with ASD. Doyle-Thomas and colleagues (2015)
found that, depending on the region, connections between the posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) and the default mode network regions showed either stronger or weaker
connectivity in children with ASD. However, they also showed a decreased functional
connectivity pattern between the PCC and medial prefrontal cortex with age, which is in
line with our developmental perspective. These patterns of mixed increased and
decreased functional connectivity in ASD can also be found in an adult sample
(Hahamy, Behrmann & Malach, 2015). Their findings could point towards a new
characteristic of ASD, namely idiosyncratic distortions of the functional connectivity
pattern compared to the typical template (Hahamy, Behrmann & Malach, 2015).
Interestingly their findings also point out the relation between the magnitude of these

10	  
	  

idiosyncratic distortions and behavioral symptoms of ASD. ASD severity could thus be
a determining factor in the distortions of the functional connectivity pattern. According
to a review of Anderson (2014) three additional studies found signs of mixed functional
connectivity during rest in autism, all of which focused on adults or adolescents with
ASD. It would therefore be interesting to replicate findings of mixed functional
connectivity found in more recent studies in our current study.
Within resting-state there are different methods to examine functional connectivity.
A couple of studies on children under the age of 12 used seed-based methods to look at
resting-state data. Seed-based analysis uses a bivariate measure (like correlation or
coherence) between the time-series of different seeds (brain regions of interest) in order
to look for areas that exhibit a high level of connectivity to your target seed
(Neuroimaging in Python team, 2009). Hyper-connectivity was found in different
studies: (a) hyper-connectivity of the striatum with the insula and the superior temporal
gyrus (Di Martino et al., 2011) and (b) hyper-connectivity within the default mode
network (Lynch et al., 2013). Washington and colleagues (2013) on the other hand
found hypo-connectivity in the intermodal default mode network, also with seed-based
methods. In contrast to seed-based functional connectivity you can also use independent
component analysis (ICA). With ICA the fMRI signal is decomposed into independent
component maps, where active voxels in every map are mostly non-overlapping. With
every component map comes an associated component activation waveform. So in short
ICA separates the fMRI signal in spatially independent maps of activity (McKeown et
al., 1997). You have functional connectivity within one map. In our age group (12 and
under) the ICA method also leads to findings of hyper-connectivity: (a) hyperconnectivity within the salience, default mode, fronto-temporal, motor and visual
networks (Uddin, Supekar, Lynch et al., 2013) and (b) hyper-connectivity within default
mode, visual and motor networks (Washington et al., 2013). We can again conclude that
we will most likely find hyper-connectivity within our sample. But based on these
studies a large hiatus appears, namely the absence of whole-brain analyses on children
under the age of 12 with ASD. This will be the focus of the current study. We use ICA
to look at the entire brain, separated into different neural networks. One of these
networks is the default mode network, which seems to be an important network in ASD.

11	  
	  

Aside from functional connectivity, structural connectivity can give further insight
into how the brain is structured anatomically. Are the brains of patients with ASD
simply wired in a different, and possibly malignant fashion? Previous research on these
structural anomalies in ASD up until now has been inconsistent (Valk et al., 2015).
However, literature based on univariate analysis techniques such as voxel-based
morphometry (VBM) have shown repeated findings of structural differences in frontal
lobe, precuneus, hippocampus, parahippocampal, amygdala, cerebellum and brain stem
(Grecucci et al., 2015, under review). Additionally, Ecker and colleagues (2010)
provided a predictive classification model of adult ASD by using structural scans in a
whole-brain classification approach with a support vector machine (SVM). Applying
SVM to gray matter structural MRI scans provided a correct classification of adults with
ASD with a specificity of 86.0% and a sensitivity of 88.0%. The most important
anatomical differences were found in middle frontal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus,
precentral gyrus, the temporal lobe, posterior cingulate gyrus, precuneus, medial
occipital gyrus, hippocampal gyrus, fusiform gyrus, insular cortex, amygdala, and
cerebellar cortex. Based on these previous findings we can pose that structural
anomalies do play a role in the symptomatology of ASD. However, aside from findings
of macrocephaly, overgrowth in occipitofrontal circumference and increased cortical
gray matter volume in young children; not much is know about the structural anomalies
of ASD in younger children. Which is why we will focus on structural connectivity of
ASD in children under the age of 12 in order to fill this gap. Additionally we will zoom
in on the relationship between these structural connectivity differences and autism
severity.
We will use Source-based Morphometry (SBM) in order to examine these structural
connectivity patterns. SBM applies the multivariate technique of Independent
Component Analysis (ICA) to anatomical data (Kašpárek et al., 2010). This multivariate
technique is proven to be more powerful than the univariate VBM (Xu et al., 2009).
Additionally, univariate approaches are known to have issues with correctly
characterizing the inherently multivariate brain morphology (Friston & Ashburner,
2004).
Current Study

12	  
	  

The present study focusses on children under the age of 12. This is a very interesting
age because previous findings show that for example the difference in brain size
between children with ASD and normal controls disappears by the time they reach
adolescence (Schumann et al., 2004). So it is important to study the effects of ASD
closer to their onset because in adulthood compensatory mechanisms might have
already taken place (Amaral, 2011).
From previous evidence we can conclude that a developmental framework is
probably the best starting point. In this developmental framework hyper-connectivity is
assumed to arise in children before the age of 12, after a puberty period this
connectivity-pattern shifts to hypo-connectivity or under-connectivity (Uddin, Supekar
& Menon, 2013). So we can expect patterns of hyper-connectivity within our restingstate fMRI sample. We used ICA to separate the signals from different networks within
the brain and we will look at the entire brain as a whole. Based on previous research, we
expect differences in the default mode, salience, fronto-temporal, motor and visual
networks but we can’t forget the striatum, the insula, the amygdala and the superior
temporal gyrus. We will try to replicate previous findings and look for the other, yet
unknown differences in resting-state functional connectivity and structural connectivity
in children with ASD.
Method
Participants
Datasets from 28 children with ASD and 28 healthy controls from the COINS
database (http://coins.mrn.org) were included in this study. Each dataset consists of a
resting fMRI acquisition; all images were obtained with additional informed consent
(Nielsen et al., 2013). For more information about the data acquisition, see
http://coins.mrn.org. Inclusion criteria were age (12 or under), absence of comorbidity
and availability of handedness, sex and IQ-scores. Control subjects were matched to
participants with ASD based on age, handedness and IQ-score. All participants and
controls were males. All patients had the DSM IV diagnose of autism without other
comorbid disorders. Participants in the control group were between eight and twelve
years old (mean = 10.6, SD = 1.24), participants in the ASD group were also between

13	  
	  

eight and twelve years old (mean = 10.7, SD =1.22). The ASD group was divided into
the severe ASD group and the mild ASD group based on their ADOS Gotham severity
scores (mild: score between 3 and 6, severe: score between 8 and 10). Both groups
differed significantly on ADOS Gotham Social Affect sub scores (t = -7.3491,
p<0.001), ADOS Gotham Restricted and Repetitive Behaviors sub scores (t = -5.636,
p<0.001) and ADOS Gotham Total score (t= -9.5019, p<0.001). For more detailed
subject characteristics, see Table 1.
Preprocessing
Preprocessing of anatomical data.
Preprocessing of our anatomical images is done using FSL and the VBM8 toolbox in
SPM (an fMRI data analysis software package called ‘Statistical Parametric Mapping’
that is used in combination with Matlab). During preprocessing of the anatomical data,
the following sequence of analysis steps was executed:
(1) Brain extraction and robust center estimation in FSL: Segmenting the anatomical
head images into brain and non-brain. This was automatically carried out using
FSL Brain extraction tool (BET, Smith; 2002).
(2) Normalization and segmentation in VBM8: anatomical images of every subject
are spatially normalized by warping them onto the MNI template. Afterwards all
normalized images are segmented into gray matter, white matter and CSF.
(3) Spatial smoothing in SPM: anatomical images are smoothed across their
neighboring voxels in order to reduce noise in the data. The normalized gray
matter images were smoothed with 8-mm full width at half-maximum (FWHM)
Gaussian kernel.
Preprocessing of functional data.

14	  
	  

Preprocessing the resting state fMRI data was done using AFNI (an fMRI analysis
software package called ‘Analysis of Functional NeuroImages’) in combination with
FSL (another fMRI data analysis package called ‘FMRIB Software Library’). Before
preprocessing all anatomical brain images were skull-stripped (as explained in
preprocessing of anatomical images) in AFNI for more precise coregistration of images.
During preprocessing of the functional data the following sequence of analysis was
executed:
(1) Reorient the functional images into an FSL friendly space was done in AFNI.
Files were reoriented to fit an RPI orientation, which means voxels are
organized from Right to left to store a row, rows are ordered from Posterior to
anterior to store a slice and slices are ordered from Inferior to superior to store a
volume. Keep in mind that all preprocessing steps were done for each subject
individually.
(2) Realignment is necessary because our subjects do not lie perfectly still during
the fMRI acquisition session. The realignment lines up each functional image
with the previous one so that each voxel always samples the same region
without blurring. Spatial alignment is executed, which is essentially a rigid body
registration and correction per functional image. Acceptable movement is up to
6mm (Ashburner et al., 2013). Please note that we have to take the age of our
subjects into consideration, since this study only focuses on children, which tend
to move more than adults during scanning sessions.
(3) Coregistration, done in FSL: This procedure attempts to align both the
functional and structural data per individual. Coregistration is a critical step
because it combines the high spatial resolution of our structural image in order
to improve the spatial localization in the low spatial resolution functional
images.
(4) Removing head movement, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signals
from functional images was performed in AFNI. This procedure removes noise
and unwanted signals from our functional data in order to focus on grey matter
signals.
(5) Normalization in FSL: The focus of this study is comparing groups, not
individuals. So we need to be able to compare the signal changes across groups

15	  
	  

of individuals. Since there is a large variation between individual brains (even
for major landmarks) we need to warp the images of every individual onto the
same reference space (a template), this is called spatial normalization. The
template that is used in this study is the MNI template (Montreal Neurological
Institute template). Each individual subject’s images are warped into the
standard space based on the MNI template.
Post-processing analysis
Independent Component Analysis of functional data.
The preprocessed functional data were analyzed using the Group ICA of the GIFT
toolbox to determine spatially independent and temporally coherent networks (Ashby,
2011). The minimum description length (MDL) principle was used to estimate a number
of independent components. Independent component (IC) estimation was executed by
using the Infomax algorithm, which is a neural network algorithm that tries to minimize
the mutual information in our networks in order to identify natural grouping and
maximally independent sources (Bell and Sejnowski, 1995). This was repeated 20 times
in ICASSO in order to ensure maximum stability of our components (Himberg et al.,
2004). GIFT identified 20 reliable independent components, an overview of these
components can be found in Appendix 1. Only components of interest were selected for
further group analysis.
Source-based Morphometry analysis of anatomical data.
SBM was also executed using the GIFT toolbox. MDL was used to estimate the
number of independent components in our preprocessed anatomical MRI data. Nine
different independent components were identified. The Infomax algorithm was used to
perform a group ICA; ICA was repeated 20 times in ICASSO. The components were
then clustered to ensure the reliability and consistence of our results. All of our resulting
9 components were deemed reliable (Iq>0.96), which indicates a stable ICA
decomposition.
During SBM each gray matter volume is converted into a vector, which leaves us
with a matrix where the 56 rows represent our 56 subjects (28 controls, 14 ASD mild

16	  
	  

and 14 ASD severe) and each column indicates a voxel. ICA decomposes this matrix in
a “mixing matrix” and a “source matrix”. The mixing matrix consists of 56 rows (each
row representing a subject) and 9 columns that represent our independent components.
This mixing matrix thus represents how much one given subject expresses each of the
components. The source matrix represents the relationship between our independent
components and the voxels. For the visualization of our grey matter volume
components, the source matrix is reshaped to a 3D image which is scaled to unit
standard deviations (Z maps) and thresholded at Z>2.5. An overview of our components
can be found in Appendix 2. The mixing matrix will be used to compute our group
differences.
Results
Group analysis of functional data.
ICA extracted 20 independent components (for an overview see Appendix 1) based
on our functional data. These 20 components represent group components across all of
the subjects in our four groups. Independent components of each subject were then
entered into a one-way ANOVA where we contrasted the ASD-mild and ASD-severe
groups with their respective control groups; additionally we contrasted the ASD-mild
group with the ASD-severe group. Age and motion during the scan were used as
covariates. It is important to note that both of our ASD groups reported a lot more
movement than the control groups. Mean motion estimates for the mild and severe ASD
group were mean = 5.03 (SD = 10.10) and mean = 9.73 (SD = 24.08) respectively,
means for the mild and severe control group were mean = 0.39 (SD = 0.58) and mean =
0.12 (SD = 0.17) respectively. Group results were corrected for multiple comparisons
by using the family-wise error-rate (FWER). Group differences were found in
component 1 and 17. Anatomical labels of regions in these components were obtained
through the WFU PickAtlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002) and can be found in Table
2. Component 1 represents the dorsal DMN and component 17 represents the auditory
network. Contrast maps of these two components revealed differences in activation of
the left anterior insula (part of component 1, peak t-value = 6.04) between the Controlmild and the DSM-mild group, and the right superior parietal lobule (part of component

17	  
	  

17, peak t-value = 6.20) between the control-severe and the DSM-severe group.
Contrast maps of these two components can be found in Appendix 3.
Group analysis of anatomical data.
We extracted 9 independent components with the SBM procedure (see Appendix 2).
The mixing matrix obtained after the SBM procedure was used to verify differences in
the expression of these components across our four groups. A MANOVA was
performed with our four groups (Control-mild, Control-severe, ASD-mild and ASDsevere) as independent variable and the weights on each of our 9 independent
components (found in the mixing matrix) as dependent variables. Differences between
groups were found in component 5 (F(3,52) = 3.99; p = 0.012) and 8 (F(3,52) = 5.034; p
= 0.004). However, component 5 did not survive our threshold (Z>2.5), which leaves us
with differences in component 8. Anatomical labels of regions in component 8 were
obtained through the WFU PickAtlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002). Component 8

18	  
	  

consists mainly of frontal areas such as the Inferior and Middle Frontal Gyrus, the
Precentral Gyrus, the Sub-Gyral, Anterior Cingulate, the Medial Frontal Gyrus, the
Superior Frontal Gyrus, the Postcentral Gyrus and the Cingulate Gyrus (See Appendix
4). All gray-matter regions represented in component 8 are presented in Table 3. After
the MANOVA, a Least Significant Differences (LSD) post-hoc test was performed.
This group-wise comparison will uncover which group differences drove these
significant results. Significant differences in the structural pattern of component 8 were
found between both our control groups and both ASD groups. The Control-mild group
showed significant differences (p = 0.009) from the ASD-mild group. Similarly, our
Control-severe group was significantly different (p = 0.008) from the ASD-severe group
(mean = 0.42, SD = 0.89). No significant differences were found between both ASD
severity groups. Correlations between the loading coefficients of component 8 and our
measures of ASD severity were not significant.
In summary we found small clusters that differ between our four groups. One as a
marker for DSM-mild which indicates hyperconnectivity of the left anterior insula with
the dorsal DMN (component 1), and one as a marker for DSM-severe which indicates
hypoconnectivity of the right superior parietal lobule with the auditory network
(component 17). From anatomical group-analysis we found an anatomical component
mainly consisting of left frontal areas that differs between ASD-mild and matched
controls, and ASD-severe and matched controls. But this significant difference didn’t
correlate with severity scores, which indicates that the brain structure in component 8 is
different but does not predict severity.
Discussion
This study aimed to assess functional and structural connectivity in children with
mild and severe Autism Spectrum Disorder compared to matched healthy controls.

19	  
	  

Resting state scans and clinical assessments from children with ASD under the age of
12 and matched healthy controls were obtained from the ABIDE database. Functional
and anatomical images were pre- and post-processed before group analysis. Functional
connectivity was examined by means of ICA and structural connectivity was assessed
by means of SBM. Results showed two possible biomarkers for functional connectivity
and one for structural connectivity. Implications of these results will be discussed in
further detail.
Functional connectivity
ICA of functional data revealed hyperconnectivity of the left anterior insula with the
dorsal DMN in children with mild ASD compared to matched healthy controls.
Previous studies have shown that atypical within-network functional connectivity of the
DMN and the insula could be a possible brain marker for children with ASD (Bos et al.,
2014; Nomi and Uddin, 2015). Within-network hyper-connectivity between the DMN
and the insula has previously been found in an ASD sample of both children and
adolescents by using a linear correlation approach (Bos et al. 2014). These withinnetwork functional connectivity differences seem to disappear later in life (Nomi and
Uddin, 2015). The atypical within-network functional connections of the DMN and the
insula could, based on previous research, be a potential biomarker for ASD. However,
our findings suggest that this might not be the end of the story since we found this
specific hyperconnectivity of the left anterior insula with the dorsal DMN only in
children under the age of 12 with a mild form of ASD. This could indicate a specific
biomarker for milder forms of autism. Consequentially, this could lead to earlier
detection of ASD severity, which could in turn be beneficial towards earlier and more
specific treatments for each individual child with ASD. This hypothesis needs further
research that focuses on connectivity measures applied specifically to the insula within
the dorsal DMN. Additionally, the role of the left anterior insula within this DMN
should be studies more extensively. Even though we know the specific functions of the
DMN as a whole (self-referential mental activity, stimulus-independent thought,
monitoring somesthesic and vegetative information, inner speech, planning of future
activities, creativity, self-awareness etc.; Callard and Margulies, 2014), our current

20	  
	  

findings point towards a possible role of the left anterior insula within this network as
an underlying cause of disability within mild forms of autism.
Additionally, ICA of functional data showed hypoconnectivity of the right superior
parietal lobule within the auditory network in children with severe ASD compared to
matched healthy controls. The auditory network is a network that can easily be defined
during resting state fMRI because it represents spontaneous BOLD fluctuations that are
common to the whole brain particularly well (Fox et al., 2008). However, no studies
have found abnormal functional connectivity within the auditory network during resting
state in ASD. There does seem to be evidence supporting the hypothesis that the social
and language impairment, which are key symptoms of ASD, could be related to
abnormalities in the auditory network (Russo, 2008). Furthermore, abnormal cortical
auditory processing has also been connected to language impairments in children with
autism (Boddaert et al., 2004). The superior parietal lobule on the other hand is found to
be activated in healthy controls, but not in adults with ASD, during execution of a
theory of mind task (Baron-Cohen et al., 1999). As a conclusion we can hypothesize
that the auditory network and more specifically the right superior parietal lobule plays
an important role in social interaction. The within-network hypoconnectivity of the
auditory network with the right superior parietal lobule in severe autism compared to
healthy controls could possibly underlie the deficits in social interaction. Additional
research is needed to further support this hypothesis, specifically within resting state
fMRI.
As a conclusion, we can state that ICA of functional connectivity in mild and severe
ASD compared to healthy controls revealed two possible biomarkers for different levels
of severity in ASD. First of all, within-network hyperconnectivity between the dorsal
DMN and the left anterior insula could point towards milder forms of ASD. Behavioral
implications of this abnormality however is not yet known and needs further research.
Within-network hypoconnectivity of the auditory network with the right superior
parietal lobule on the other hand could point towards more severe cases of ASD. This
abnormal functional connectivity pattern could point towards difficulties in social
interactions occurring in people with ASD. Taken together, both findings seem to
indicate the possibility of hemispheric differences in mild versus severe autism. This

21	  
	  

could be an interesting hypothesis towards further research onto functional connectivity
patterns in autism.
Structural connectivity
Lastly, multivariate morphometric network analysis by means of SBM of anatomical
data revealed differences in the anatomical structure of component 8, which mainly
consisted of left frontal areas, between both ASD-mild and matched controls, and ASDsevere and matched controls. For future convenience we will call this gray matter
network of component 8 the Frontal – Cingulate network, named after its main
components. This Frontal – Cingulate network, which is centered in the frontal lobe
with some connections to the temporal lobe (Sub Gyral) and the parietal lobe
(Postcentral Gyrus), showed an abnormal expression in both severity groups compared
to matched controls. Regions include the Inferior and Middle Frontal Gyrus, the
Precentral Gyrus, the Sub-Gyral, Anterior Cingulate, the Medial Frontal Gyrus, the
Superior Frontal Gyrus, the Postcentral Gyrus and the Cingulate Gyrus. This replicates
some of these regions found in the whole-brain classification study of Ecker and
colleagues (2010) namely the middle frontal gyrus, the inferior frontal gyrus and the
precentral gyrus.
There is evidence from previous research that suggests that the frontal lobe plays a
very important role in a social cognition network that relates to the social deficits
known in autism (Baron-Cohen et al., 1999). In this previous study, deficits in the left
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann area 44, 45 and 46) and the left medial frontal
cortex (Brodmann area 9) were found while executing a theory of mind task in ASD.
These Brodmann areas are also represented in the Frontal – Cingulate network in the
following regions: the Inferior and Middle Frontal Gyrus, the Precentral Gyrus, the
Medial Frontal Gyrus and the Superior Frontal Gyrus (for a detailed overview of the
Brodmann areas in the Frontal – Cingulate network see Table 3). A number of structural
neuroimaging studies have found frontal lobe abnormalities in patients with autism
(Carper and Courchesne, 2000, 2005; Herbert et al., 2003; Salmond et al., 2003;
Sundaram et al., 2008). These abnormalities in prefrontal cortical regions are known to
be correlated with deficits in social cognition, executive functioning and language in
patients with ASD (Sundaram et al., 2008). This accumulating evidence that supports

22	  
	  

our findings leads us to believe that abnormalities in frontal lobe gray matter might be a
core mechanism that underlies deficits in social functioning in ASD.
Additionally, abnormalities in the structural Frontal – Cingulate network include the
Pre and Postcentral Gyrus. These regions correspond to the motor cortex and the
somatosensory cortex, which is important for proprioceptive feedback during
movement. Increased gray matter in both the Pre and Postcentral Gyrus has previously
been shown in children with ASD (Bonilha et al., 2008). Motor impairments such as
hypotonia and motor apraxia are categorized as associated symptoms to ASD,
especially in young children (Ming, Brimacombe and Wagner, 2007). Even though
motor impairment is considered an associated symptom, recent studies show that it
could still prove to be useful in the diagnostic process of ASD (Torres et al., 2013). Our
findings could thus reflect the underlying mechanisms of the occurrence of these
associated motor symptoms in ASD.
The Frontal – Cingulate network also contains the Anterior Cingulate and Cingulate
Gyrus, which is part of the limbic system. Structural brain differences in both structures,
which replicate previous findings (Hyde et al. 2010), represent key symptoms of ASD.
The cingulate cortices play a role in linking the perception of socially relevant stimuli to
motivation, emotion and cognition (Adolphs, 2001). The cingulate gyrus is proven to be
a socially relevant brain area that is known to be atypical in ASD (Hyde et al., 2010).
The anterior cingulate gyrus on the other hand is known for its involvement in repetitive
behavior (Whiteside, Port and Abramowitz, 2004; Hyde et al., 2010). Both social
deficits and repetitive behavior are key factors in the symptomatology of ASD, it is
therefor unsurprising that their underlying neural mechanisms show structural
abnormalities compared to healthy controls.
Lastly, the Frontal – Cingulate network includes the Sub Gyral, which is part of the
temporal lobe. Previous studies have indicated reduced white matter volume in the left
Sub Gyral in young children with ASD (Bonilha et al., 2008) and greater bilateral
activity of the Sub Gyral during imitation in older children with ASD (Williams et al.,
2006). Furthermore, our findings of abnormalities in the Sub-Gyral in ASD replicate
findings in a recent study by Grecucci and colleagues (2015, under review). Difficulties
with imitation might be one of the primary deficits in ASD (Rogers, 1999), which could

23	  
	  

be due to underlying structural abnormalities in the Sub Gyral. Future research into this
connection between imitation difficulties and structural Sub Gyral abnormalities in
ASD is needed to further substantiate this hypothesis.
As a conclusion, we can pose that our structural connectivity analysis revealed
structural abnormalities in regions that are linked to social deficits, theory of mind,
executive functioning, language, motor impairment, repetitive behavior and imitation.
All of these have been linked to impairments in ASD which leads us to believe that an
atypical structural network as found in the Frontal – Cingulate network might prove to
be a core source of impairment. The Frontal – Cingulate network tends to have a
negative expression in children with both mild and severe ASD compared to matched
controls. This results in less gray matter volume in the regions observed in the Frontal –
Cingulate network. However, changes in intra-connectivity are also a viable explanation
for this different structural expression pattern in ASD. Further research focusing on
connectivity methods applied to these areas is needed to further support this hypothesis.
Conclusion
In this study we examined possible biomarkers of ASD by means of functional and
structural connectivity analysis of resting state fMRI. We can conclude that functional
and structural connectivity analysis of resting state fMRI data in children with mild and
severe autism reveals abnormalities compared to matched healthy controls. We found
two possible biomarkers by means of ICA and one by means of SBM. Within-network
hyperconnectivity between the dorsal DMN and the left anterior insula might be a
possible biomarker for milder forms of autism whilst within-network hypoconnectivity
of the auditory network with the right superior parietal lobule might indicate more
severe forms of autism. Additionally, we found structural abnormalities in a gray-matter
network (the Frontal – Cingulate network) that mainly consists of left frontal areas with
connections to the temporal and parietal lobe in both severity groups compared to
healthy controls. Whilst our findings in functional connectivity could be used to
differentiate between mild and severe forms of autism, our findings in structural
connectivity point towards a more unified abnormality that is consistent across all
degrees of ASD severity.

24	  
	  

Limitations of the study
First of all we only used male participants in our study, which limits our
generalizability. This is somewhat countered by the fact that the male-to-female ratio of
prevalence in autism is 3.3:1, which indicates higher prevalence in males (Baird et al.,
2006).
Another issue is the high amount of movement within both ASD groups compared to
the healthy controls. Even though we included the motion estimation as a covariate in
our analysis, the movement estimations are much higher than the normally accepted
threshold.
Lastly, we have a small sample size of 14 subjects per group which means that we
should consider our results as preliminary. Future research should focus on replicating
our findings before actual conclusions can be drawn.

25	  
	  

Nederlandstalige samenvatting
Neuronale connectiviteit zou mogelijks een verklarend framework kunnen bieden voor
autisme spectrum stoornissen. Autisme spectrum stoornis is een veelvoorkomende
ontwikkelingsstoornis die gekarakteriseerd wordt door verstoorde sociale interactie,
verstoorde communicatie, beperkte interesses en repetitief gedrag. Twee ogenschijnlijk
contradictorische theorieën over de etiologie van autisme spectrum stoornissen, de
onder-connectiviteitstheorie en de hyper-connectiviteitstheorie, kunnen mogelijks
geïntegreerd worden in een meer gemengd en genuanceerd perspectief. In de huidige
studie wordt gebruik gemaakt van een publiek beschikbare dataset genaamd ABIDE. Er
wordt onderzoek gedaan naar de functionele en structurele connectiviteitspatronen van
jonge kinderen (< 12 jaar oud) met ernstig en milde vormen van autisme. Beide groepen
worden vergeleken met gezonde gematchte controle groepen. Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) van functionele data vertoonde binnen-netwerk hyperconnectiviteit
tussen het dorsale Default Mode Netwerk (DMN) en de linker anterieure insula als een
mogelijke biomarker voor mildere vormen van autisme, en binnen-netwerk onderconnectiviteit van het auditieve netwerk met de rechter superieure pariëtale lobule als
mogelijke indicatie voor ernstigere vormen van autisme. Verder vertoonde de SourceBased Morphometry (SBM) analyse structurele abnormaliteiten in een grijze-stof
netwerk dat voornamelijk bestaat uit linker frontale gebieden met connecties naar de
temporale en pariëtale lob in beide autisme groepen vergeleken met de controle
groepen. Terwijl onze bevindingen met betrekking tot functionele connectiviteit
mogelijks zouden kunnen differentiëren tussen milde en ernstigere vormen van autisme,
tonen onze bevindingen in structurele connectiviteit net een algemene abnormaliteit
over alle gradaties van autisme binnen onze studie.

26	  
	  

References
Adolphs, R. (2001). The neurobiology of social cognition. Current opinion in
neurobiology, 11(2), 231-239.
Anderson, J. S. (2014). Cortical underconnectivity hypothesis in autism: evidence
from functional connectivity MRI. In Comprehensive Guide to Autism(pp.
1457-1471). Springer New York.
Amaral, D. G. (2011). The promise and the pitfalls of autism research: an
introductory note for new autism researchers. Brain research, 1380, 3-9.
Ashburner, J., Barnes, G., Chen, C., Daunizeau, J., Flandin, G., Friston, K., … &
Phillips, C. (2013). SPM manual. Retrieved on the 15th of May 2014, from
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/doc/manual.pdf
Ashby, F. G. (2011). Statistical analysis of fMRI data. MIT press.
Baio, J. (2012). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders – Autism and
developmental disabilities monitoring network, 14 sites, United States, 2008.
Surveillance Summaries, 61:3, 1-19.
Baird, G., Simonoff, E., Pickles, A., Chandler, S., Loucas, T., Meldrum, D., &
Charman, T. (2006). Prevalence of disorders of the autism spectrum in a
population cohort of children in South Thames: the Special Needs and
Autism Project (SNAP). The lancet, 368(9531), 210-215.
Baron‐Cohen, S., Ring, H. A., Wheelwright, S., Bullmore, E. T., Brammer, M. J.,
Simmons, A., & Williams, S. C. (1999). Social intelligence in the normal
and autistic brain: an fMRI study. European Journal of Neuroscience, 11(6),
1891-1898.
Bell, A. J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). An information-maximization approach to
blind separation and blind deconvolution. Neural computation, 7(6), 11291159.

27	  
	  

Belmonte, M. K., Allen, G., Beckel-Mitchener, A., Boulanger, L. M., Carper, R. A.,
& Webb, S. J. (2004). Autism and abnormal development of brain
connectivity. The Journal of Neuroscience, 24:42, 9228-9231.
Biswal, B. B., Mennes, M., Zuo, X. N., Gohel, S., Kelly, C., Smith, S. M., ... &
Windischberger, C. (2010). Toward discovery science of human brain
function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107:10, 47344739.
Boddaert, N., Chabane, N., Belin, P., Bourgeois, M., Royer, V., Barthelemy, C., ...
& Zilbovicius, M. (2004). Perception of complex sounds in autism: abnormal
auditory

cortical

processing

in

children. American

Journal

of

Psychiatry,161(11), 2117-2120.
Bonilha, L., Cendes, F., Rorden, C., Eckert, M., Dalgalarrondo, P., Li, L. M., &
Steiner, C. E. (2008). Gray and white matter imbalance–Typical structural
abnormality underlying classic autism?. Brain and Development, 30(6), 396401.
Bos, D. J., van Raalten, T. R., Oranje, B., Smits, A. R., Kobussen, N. A., van Belle,
J., ... & Durston, S. (2014). Developmental differences in higher-order
resting-state

networks

in

Autism

Spectrum

Disorder. NeuroImage:

Clinical, 4, 820-827.
Callard, F., & Margulies, D. S. (2014). What we talk about when we talk about the
default mode network. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 8.
Carper, R. A., & Courchesne, E. (2000). Inverse correlation between frontal lobe
and cerebellum sizes in children with autism. Brain, 123(4), 836-844.
Carper, R. A., & Courchesne, E. (2005). Localized enlargement of the frontal cortex
in early autism. Biological psychiatry, 57(2), 126-133.
Courchesne, E., Mouton, P. R., Calhoun, M. E., Semendeferi, K., Ahrens-Barbeau,
C., Hallet, M. J., Barnes, C. C., & Pierce, K. (2011). Neuron number and size
in prefrontal cortex of children with autism. Jama, 306:18, 2001-2010.

28	  
	  

Damarla, S. R., Keller, T. A., Kana, R. K., Cherkassky, V. L., Williams, D. L.,
Minshew, N. J., & Just, M. A. (2010). Cortical underconnectivity coupled
with preserved visuospatial cognition in autism: evidence from an fMRI
study of an embedded figures task. Autism Research, 3:5, 273-279.
de Bildt, A., Oosterling, I. J., van Lang, N. D., Sytema, S., Minderaa, R. B., van
Engeland, H., Roos, S., Buitelaar, J. K., van der Gaag, R., & de Jonge, M. V.
(2011). Standardized ADOS scores: measuring severity of autism spectrum
disorders in a Dutch sample. Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
41:3, 311-319.
Di Martino, A., Kelly, C., Grzadzinski, R., Zuo, X. N., Mennes, M., Mairena, M. A.,
Lord, C., Castellanos, X. C., & Milham, M. P. (2011). Aberrant striatal
functional connectivity in children with autism. Biological psychiatry, 69:9,
847-856.
Di Martino, A., Yan, C. G., Li, Q., Denio, E., Castellanos, F. X., Alaerts, K., ... &
Milham, M. P. (2013). The autism brain imaging data exchange: towards a
large-scale evaluation of the intrinsic brain architecture in autism. Molecular
psychiatry.
Doyle‐Thomas, K. A., Lee, W., Foster, N. E., Tryfon, A., Ouimet, T., Hyde, K. L.,
... & Anagnostou, E. (2015). Atypical functional brain connectivity during
rest in autism spectrum disorders. Annals of neurology.
Ecker, C., Rocha-Rego, V., Johnston, P., Mourao-Miranda, J., Marquand, A., Daly,
E. M., ... & MRC AIMS Consortium. (2010). Investigating the predictive
value of whole-brain structural MR scans in autism: a pattern classification
approach. Neuroimage, 49(1), 44-56.
Fox, M. D., Zhang, D., Snyder, A. Z., & Raichle, M. E. (2009). The global signal
and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks. Journal of
neurophysiology, 101(6), 3270-3283.
Friston, K. J., & Ashburner, J. (2004). Generative and recognition models for
neuroanatomy. Neuroimage, 23(1), 21-24.

29	  
	  

Geschwind, D. H., & Levitt, P. (2007). Autism spectrum disorders: developmental
disconnection syndromes. Current opinion in neurobiology, 17, 103-111.
Gotham, K., Bishop, S. L., & Lord, C. (2011). Diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorders. In Amaral, D. G., Dawson, G., & Geschwind, D. H. (ed.), Autism
Spectrum Disorders. (pp. 30-43). New York: Oxford University Press.
Gotham, K., Pickles, A., & Lord, C. (2009). Standardizing ADOS scores for a
measure of severity in autism spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 39:5, 693-705.
Grecucci, A., Rubicondo, D., Siugzdaite, R., Surian, L., & Remo, J. (2015).
Uncovering the social deficits in the autistic brain. A Source-Based
Morphometric study. Manuscript sumbitted for publication.
Hahamy, A., Behrmann, M., & Malach, R. (2015). The idiosyncratic brain:
distortion of spontaneous connectivity patterns in autism spectrum disorder.
Nature neuroscience.
Herbert, M. R., Ziegler, D. A., Deutsch, C. K., O’brien, L. M., Lange, N.,
Bakardjiev, A., ... & Caviness, V. S. (2003). Dissociations of cerebral cortex,
subcortical and cerebral white matter volumes in autistic boys. Brain, 126(5),
1182-1192.
Himberg, J., Hyvärinen, A., & Esposito, F. (2004). Validating the independent
components of neuroimaging time series via clustering and visualization.
Neuroimage, 22(3), 1214-1222.
Hyde, K. L., Samson, F., Evans, A. C., & Mottron, L. (2010). Neuroanatomical
differences in brain areas implicated in perceptual and other core features of
autism

revealed

by

cortical

thickness

analysis

and

voxel‐based

morphometry.Human brain mapping, 31(4), 556-566.
Jack, C. R., Bernstein, M. A., Fox, N. C., Thompson, P., Alexander, G., Harvey, D.,
... & Weiner, M. W. (2008). The Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative

30	  
	  

(ADNI): MRI methods. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 27:4, 685691.
Just, M. A., Cherkassky, V. L., Keller, T. A., & Minshew, N. J. (2004). Cortical
activation and synchronization during sentence comprehension in highfunctioning autism: evidence of underconnectivity. Brain, 127:8, 1811-1821.
Just, M. A., Keller, T. A., Malave, V. L., Kana, R. K., & Varma, S. (2012). Autism
as a neural systems disorder: a theory of frontal-posterior underconnectivity.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 36:4, 1292-1313.
Kana, R. K., Libero, L. E., & Moore, M. S. (2011). Disrupted cortical connectivity
theory as an explanatory model for autism spectrum disorders. Physics of life
reviews, 8:4, 410-437.
Kašpárek, T., Mareček, R., Schwarz, D., Přikryl, R., Vaníček, J., Mikl, M., &
Češková, E. (2010). Source-­‐‑based morphometry of gray matter volume in
men with first-­‐‑episode schizophrenia. Human brain mapping, 31(2), 300-310
Khan, S., Gramfort, A., Shetty, N. R., Kitzbichler, M. G., Ganesan, S., Moran, J. M.,
... & Kenet, T. (2013). Local and long-range functional connectivity is
reduced in concert in autism spectrum disorders. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 110:8, 3107-3112.
Koshino, H., Kana, R. K., Keller, T. A., Cherkassky, V. L., Minshew, N. J., & Just,
M. A. (2008). fMRI investigation of working memory for faces in autism:
visual coding and underconnectivity with frontal areas. Cerebral Cortex,
18:2, 289-300.
Lainhart, J. E., Piven, J., Wzorek, M., Landa, R., Santangelo, S. L., Coon, H., &
Folstein, S. E. (1997). Macrocephaly in children and adults with autism.
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36:2,
282-290.
Lynch, C. J., Uddin, L. Q., Supekar, K., Khouzam, A., Phillips, J., & Menon, V.
(2013). Default mode network in childhood autism: posteromedial cortex

31	  
	  

heterogeneity and relationship with social deficits. Biological psychiatry,
74:3, 212-219.
MacKenzie, H. (2008). Reaching and teaching the child with autism spectrum
disorder. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
McKeown, M. J., Makeig, S., Brown, G. G., Jung, T. P., Kindermann, S. S., Bell, A.
J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1997). Analysis of fMRI data by blind separation into
independent spatial components (No. NHRC-REPT-97-42). NAVAL
HEALTH RESEARCH CENTER SAN DIEGO CA.
Ming, X., Brimacombe, M., & Wagner, G. C. (2007). Prevalence of motor
impairment in autism spectrum disorders. Brain and Development, 29(9),
565-570.
Minshew, N. J., & Keller, T. A. (2010). The nature of brain dysfunction in autism:
functional brain imaging studies. Current opinion in neurology, 23:2, 124.
Müller, R. A., Shih, P., Keehn, B., Deyoe, J. R., Leyden, K. M., & Shukla, D. K.
(2011). Underconnected, but how? A survey of functional connectivity MRI
studies in autism spectrum disorders. Cerebral Cortex, 21:10, 2233-2243.
Neuroimaging in Python team. (2009). Seed correlation/coherence with fMRI data.
Retrieved

on

the

15th

of

May

2014,

from

http://nipy.org/nitime/examples/seed_analysis.html
Nielsen, J. A., Zielinski, B. A., Fletcher, P. T., Alexander, A. L., Lange, N., Bigler,
E. D., Lainhart, J. E., & Anderson, J. S. (2013). Multisite functional
connectivity MRI classification of autism: ABIDE results. Frontiers in
human neuroscience, 7.
Nomi, J. S., & Uddin, L. Q. (2015). Developmental changes in large-scale network
connectivity in autism. NeuroImage: Clinical, 7, 732-741.
Rogers, S. J. (1999). An examination of the imitation deficit in autism.

32	  
	  

Russo, N. M. (2008). A Key to Understanding Social Communication Deficits in
Autism Spectrum Disorders: Neural Processing of Sound and Speech
Intonation. ProQuest.
Salmond, C. H., De Haan, M., Friston, K. J., Gadian, D. G., & Vargha-Khadem, F.
(2003). Investigating individual differences in brain abnormalities in
autism.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences,358(1430), 405-413.
Savitz, J. B., Rauch, S. L., & Drevets, W. C. (2013). Clinical application of brain
imaging for the diagnosis of mood disorders: the current state of play.
Molecular psychiatry, 18:5, 528-539.
Schumann, C. M., Hamstra, J., Goodlin-Jones, B. L., Lotspeich, L. J., Kwon, H.,
Buonocore, M. H., Lammers, C. R., Reiss, A. L., & Amaral, D. G. (2004).
The amygdala is enlarged in children but not adolescents with autism; the
hippocampus is enlarged at all ages. The Journal of Neuroscience, 24:28,
6392-6401.
Scott, A., Courtney, W., Wood, D., de la Garza, R., Lane, S., King, M., Wang, R.,
Roberts, J., Turner, J. A., & Calhoun, V. D. (2011). COINS: An innovative
informatics and neuroimaging tool suite built for large heterogeneous
datasets. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 5, 33.
Smith, S. M. (2002). Fast robust automated brain extraction. Human brain
mapping, 17(3), 143-155.
Solomon, M., Ozonoff, S. J., Ursu, S., Ravizza, S., Cummings, N., Ly, S., & Carter,
C. S. (2009). The neural substrates of cognitive control deficits in autism
spectrum disorders. Neuropsychologia, 47:12, 2515-2526.
Sparks, B. F., Friedman, S. D., Shaw, D. W., Aylward, E. H., Echelard, D., Artru, A.
A., Maravilla, K. R., Giedd, J. N., Munson, J., Dawson, G., & Dager, S. R.
(2002). Brain structural abnormalities in young children with autism
spectrum disorder. Neurology, 59:2, 184-192.

33	  
	  

Sporns, O. (2007). Brain connectivity. Retrieved on 15th of May 2014, from
http://scholarpedia.org/article/Brain_connectivity
Sporns, O., Tononi, G., & Kötter, R. (2005). The human connectome: a structural
description of the human brain. PLoS computational biology, 1:4, e42.
Sundaram, S. K., Kumar, A., Makki, M. I., Behen, M. E., Chugani, H. T., &
Chugani, D. C. (2008). Diffusion tensor imaging of frontal lobe in autism
spectrum disorder. Cerebral cortex, 18(11), 2659-2665.
Supekar, K., Musen, M., & Menon, V. (2009). Development of large-scale
functional brain networks in children. PLoS biology, 7:7, e1000157.
Supekar, K., Uddin, L. Q., Khouzam, A., Phillips, J., Gaillard, W. D., Kenworthy, L.
E., Yerys, B. E., Vaidya, C. J., & Menon, V. (2013). Brain
Hyperconnectivity in Children with Autism and its Links to Social Deficits.
Cell reports, 5:3, 738-747.
Testa-Silva, G., Loebel, A., Giugliano, M., de Kock, C. P., Mansvelder, H. D., &
Meredith, R. M. (2012). Hyperconnectivity and slow synapses during early
development of medial prefrontal cortex in a mouse model for mental
retardation and autism. Cerebral Cortex, 22:6, 1333-1342.
Torres, E. B., Isenhower, R. W., Yanovich, P., Rehrig, G., Stigler, K., Nurnberger,
J., & José, J. V. (2013). Strategies to develop putative biomarkers to
characterize the female phenotype with autism spectrum disorders. Journal
of neurophysiology, 110(7), 1646-1662.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., Landeau, B., Papathanassiou, D., Crivello, F., Etard, O.,
Delcroix, N., ... & Joliot, M. (2002). Automated anatomical labeling of
activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI
MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage, 15(1), 273-289.
Uddin, L. Q., Supekar, K., Lynch, C. J., Khouzam, A., Phillips, J., Feinstein, C.,
Ryali, S., & Menon, V. (2013). Salience Network–Based Classification and

34	  
	  

Prediction of Symptom Severity in Children With Autism. JAMA psychiatry,
70:8, 869-879.
Uddin, L. Q., Supekar, K., & Menon, V. (2013). Reconceptualizing functional brain
connectivity in autism from a developmental perspective. Frontiers in
human neuroscience, 7, 458.
Valk, S. L., Di Martino, A., Milham, M. P., & Bernhardt, B. C. (2015). Multicenter
mapping of structural network alterations in autism. Human brain mapping.
Van Essen, D. C., Ugurbil, K., Auerbach, E., Barch, D., Behrens, T. E. J., Bucholz,
R., ... & Yacoub, E. (2012). The Human Connectome Project: a data
acquisition perspective. Neuroimage, 62:4, 2222-2231.
Washington, S. D., Gordon, E. M., Brar, J., Warburton, S., Sawyer, A. T., Wolfe,
A., Mease-Ference, E. R., Girton, L., Hailu, A., Mbwana, J., Gaillard, W. D.,
Kalbfleisch, M. L., & VanMeter, J. W. (2013). Dysmaturation of the default
mode network in autism. Human brain mapping, 35, 1284-1296.
Webb, S. J., Nalty, T., Munson, J., Brock, C., Abbott, R., & Dawson, G. (2007).
Rate of head circumference growth as a function of autism diagnosis and
history of autistic regression. Journal of Child Neurology, 22:10, 1182-1190.
White, S., O’Reilly, H., & Frith, U. (2009). Big heads, small details and autism.
Neuropsychologia, 47:5, 1274-1281.
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., & Ford, J. M. (2012). Default mode network activity and
connectivity in psychopathology. Annual review of clinical psychology, 8,
49-76.
Whiteside, S. P., Port, J. D., & Abramowitz, J. S. (2004). A meta–analysis of
functional neuroimaging in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatry
Research: Neuroimaging, 132(1), 69-79.
Williams, J. H., Waiter, G. D., Gilchrist, A., Perrett, D. I., Murray, A. D., & Whiten,
A. (2006). Neural mechanisms of imitation and ‘mirror neuron’functioning
in autistic spectrum disorder. Neuropsychologia, 44(4), 610-621.

35	  
	  

Xu, L., Groth, K. M., Pearlson, G., Schretlen, D. J., & Calhoun, V. D. (2009).
Source-­‐‑based morphometry: The use of independent component analysis to
identify gray matter differences with application to schizophrenia. Human
brain mapping, 30(3), 711-724.
Zhou, D., Thompson, W. K., & Siegle, G. (2009). MATLAB toolbox for functional
connectivity. Neuroimage, 47(4), 1590-1607.

36	  
	  

Appendix 1
Overview of the 20 independent components of our functional data.

37	  
	  

38	  
	  

39	  
	  

40	  
	  

Appendix 2
Overview of the 9 components of our anatomical data. Note that component 5 did
not survive Z>2.5 thresholding and is therefor not included in the overview.

41	  
	  

42	  
	  

Appendix 3
Contrast maps of functional component 1 and 17. Only functional components 1 and
17 showed differences across our four groups. Contrasts resulting from the ANOVA of
these components are shown. Coordinates of component 1: x = -33, y = 24, z = -6; peak
t-value = 6.04 in the left anterior insula (voxel size = 1) which is part of the dorsal DMN
(component 1). Coordinates of component 17: x = 39, y = -42, z = 54; peak t-value =
6.20 in the right superior parietal lobule (voxel size = 3) within the auditory network
(component 17).

43	  
	  

Appendix 4
Layout of SBM component 8 (Frontal – Cingulate network). Only our eight’
component shows differences in the loading coefficient between our control groups and
the ASD groups. Regions included: Inferior and Middle Frontal Gyrus, the Precentral
Sulcus, the Sub-Gyral, Anterior Cingulate, the Medial Frontal Gyrus, the Superior
Frontal Gyrus, the Postcentral Gyrus and the Cingulate Gyrus (see Table 2).

