Browsing the Connectome: 3D Functional and Structural Brain Networks in the Cloud
Katja Heuer, Ralph Schurade, Joachim Böttger, Daniel S. Margulies, Thomas R. Knösche, Angela D. Friederici & Alfred Anwander
Methods
hods
ods
od

Testserie 2

Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany
heuer@cbs.mpg.de

Introduction
This project aims at providing a user-friendly platform for the
publication of functional & structural connectivity data in an
interactive 3D visualization directly linked to your paper.
• . Multimodal visualization allows associating the functional
coupling between brain regions to structural connections
• . Despite wide range of available methods [1], visualization of 3D
structure in 2D images drastically reduces information content
• . To overcome this loss: directly publish interactive 3D models
based on the platform independent webGL technology [2].
• . now: extended multi-modal open source platform brainGL-web
• to interactively publish functional & structural connectivity data
• for a direct visualization in the web browser and
• to develop full-fledged applications based on JavaScript& WebGL
• . Interactivity allows new insights into the relation of the multimodal networks, here exemplified by the language network.

Data

Methods
Visualization based on brainGL (desktop software)
• selection of major fascicles
• production of surface connectivity maps from the correlation matrix and computation of
edge-bundled representations of thresholded functional connections between ROIs [4]
• export for visualization in the brainGL web application (braingl-web.googlecode.com)

Example data
Functional connectivity was calculated
from rs-fMRI data (900vol, n=65) from
the enhanced NKI-Rockland sample [3].
After standard preprocessing, the functional connectivity matrix for the
average brain surface was computed.

Most user-friendly design
• Simple structure of configuration files: the template website can easily show new data by
adaptation of only four files (index-, elements-, scenes- and ui-files; mainly the file names)

For comparison of the "bundled" functional data with the structural connectivity and the location of the fascicles we
computed full-brain diffusion MRI tractography (MedINRIA) and selected the
9 major long-range fascicles (AF, SLF,
IFOF, UNC, ILF, CG, CST, TR and CC). These
were extracted form a representative
subject selected at random from a large
database of dMRI data acquired with
high spatial and angular resolution
(1.7 mm iso, 60 dir, Siemens Trio, Grappa
2, av 3). The preprocessing included
motion correction and registration to
the single subject T1 anatomy.

• Elements files: specify file names and modify parameters of single elements (color; transparency; lines versus tubes)
• Scene-files: define which elements should be displayed at once and which should additionally be available for interaction; define focus by position of camera with smooth transition from previous position. From there users can continue to explore the data by themselves.
• Viewer can easily be integrated into any website
• tutorial available at braingl-web.googlecode.com

Applications

Results
Surfing the connectome: An interactive combined visualization of structural and functional connectivity
1 Template website at openscience.cbs.mpg.de/brainnetworks.

Surfing the connectome: Functional connectivity clusters [3]
5 Publication-specific website at openscience.cbs.mpg.de/schaefer.

2

0

Fig 1. Transcallosal functional connectivity of the precentral gyrus. The end points on the right motor cortex
are rainbow coded and show an asymmetric devision into two functional "bundles".

6

0.4

Fig 2. rs-functional connectivity (unthresholded),
"bundled" functional connectivity seeded in
Broca‘s area (BA 45) and
the underlying inferior
fronto-occipital fascicle.

Connectivity networks. Fig 5. All 33 connectivity networks found in the hierarchical cluster analysis of group averaged
connectivity. Fig 6. Individually chosen connectivity networks from the 33 found in the hierarchical cluster analysis of
time and group averaged connectivity. Networks can be inspected interactively and in three dimensions in relation to
anatomical slices and surface and combined to study their interaction.
Surfing the connectome: The brain basis of language processing [2]
7 Publication-specific website at onpub.cbs.mpg.de.

B

3

C

Fig 3. "Bundled" functional connectivity seeded in Broca‘s area (BA 44) and Wernicke‘s area and the underlying arcuate fascicle of the language
network in relation to anatomical slices and surface.

D

4

Fig 4. Transcallosal functional connectivity of the precentral gyrus. The end points on right and left motor cortex are rainbow coded for a detailed
visualization of the single properties.

Conclusion
• 3D visualization enhances the research dissemination process
• Beneficial for connectome research, task based fMRI or new structural MRI sequences
• Our intuitive webGL based application provides an easily usable platform for the community
• Improved ways of online data visualization in terms of scientific content and understanding
• The interactive presentation opens a new access to the data which allows new scientific findings
• Improved accessibility of the research results fascilitates public visibility of the results
• The open source platform is ready to be used as a platform for the next generation of neuroscientific 3D publications and might become a community driven standard platform.
Outlook: Use as platform for visual exploration and communication between neuroscientists and
medical doctors (exchange 3D pictures without installation of any additional visualization software).

Fig 7. Online-publication with interactive viewer. Each text section is associated with
a dedicated
d
scene displaying the currently discussed data from the appropriate camera
angle. A. The functional language areas are connected by specific fiber bundles which
an
are color coded. B. Functional connections of the language network with the underlyi
lying arcuate fascicle. C. Parcellation of the language cortex and the underlying
str
structural connectivities between the language cortices. D. Interaction of syntax and
prosody: The role of the corpus callosum. Option to visualize all other provided fiber
tracts by click.

Info

References
1 Margulies DS et al. (2013), 'Visualizing the human connectome', NeuroImage,
15: 445–461.
2 Friederici AD (2011), 'The brain basis of language processing: From structure
to function', Physiol Rev, 91: 1357–1392. Interactive version available at
onpub.cbs.mpg.de.
3 Nathan Kline Institute-Rockland Sample: fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/
indi/enhanced/.
4 Schaefer A et al. (2014), 'Dynamic network participation of functional connectivity
hubs assessed by resting-state fMRI', Front Hum Neurosci, 8: 1–13.
5 Böttger J et al. (2014), 'Three-dimensional mean-shift edge bundling for the
visualization of functional connectivity in the brain', IEEE TVCG, 20: 471–480.
open-source software available
at braingl.googlecode.com

web application available
at braingl-web.googlecode.com

# 3872
Wednesday & Thursday
June 11 12:45–14:45
openscience.cbs.mpg.de/
brainnetworks/Heuer_
OHBM_2014.pdf

