Commentary

Biological
Psychiatry

Brain Connectivity in Autism: The Signiﬁcance
of Null Findings
Daniel P. Kennedy, Lynn K. Paul, and Ralph Adolphs
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has become a case study for
illustrating the difﬁculty in tracing a psychiatric disorder to its
underlying causes—psychological, genetic, or neurological.
Aside from theories derived from the very criteria used to
diagnose ASD, one would be hard-pressed to ﬁnd a psychological theory that is not hotly disputed. Genetic investigations
revealed that very large sample sizes are required to tease out
the very small effects of very many genes, or large effects of
genes present in only very few cases. Meanwhile, investigators
doing work at the neurological level have held out hope that
their theories might, ﬁnally, serve to provide a compact and
reliable explanation of ASD that could best mediate between
the genes and the phenotype. A new study by Lefebvre et al.
(1) in this issue of Biological Psychiatry is beginning to cast
some doubt that a simple anatomical story will emerge.
Arguably the leading neurological theory of ASD is about
brain connectivity (2). The popularity of this theory is unsurprising, as ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting
most of the brain and because the emergent properties of
brain function are based on neural connectivity. Yet the
connectivity hypothesis has been vague ever since its inception, and slowly morphing from a theory about underconnectivity in ASD, to one about distal underconnectivity paired with
local overconnectivity, to one about atypical connectivity in
either direction (or both).
The new work by Lefebvre et al. (1) suggests that at least
one speciﬁc indication of atypical connectivity may be a false
positive altogether. Their study looked at the largest white
matter tract in the human brain, the corpus callosum, whose
200 million axons enable rapid communication between the
two cerebral hemispheres (i.e., interhemispheric communication). The corpus callosum arose only once in phylogeny, with
the evolution of placental mammals: Marsupials such as
opossums and kangaroos have no corpus callosum. The most
parsimonious explanation for evolution of the corpus callosum
is that it arose to facilitate long-distance integration within
large brains. As cognitive and clinical branches of neuroscience have shifted away from a focus on individual brain
areas studied in isolation and toward greater appreciation of
how these brain areas operate within and across brain networks, there has been a proliferation of studies targeting the
corpus callosum in the search for neural bases of psychiatric
disorders.
Abnormalities of the corpus callosum are found in a wide
range of developmental disorders caused by genetic and
environmental factors. For example, enlargement of the
corpus callosum has been reported in neuroﬁbromatosis 1
and in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome; callosal reduction has been
reported in Williams syndrome, low-birth weight, fetal alcohol
syndrome, attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder - and ASD.

Furthermore, recent work conﬁrmed that congenital abnormalities of the corpus callosum can produce ASD symptoms
largely indistinguishable from idiopathic ASD (3). So there is
little question that developing in the absence of a corpus
callosum can result in an atypical mind and behavior. People
with ASD do not generally lack a corpus callosum altogether.
But how strong is the evidence that it is even abnormal at all?
In their investigation of size of the corpus callosum in
idiopathic ASD, Lefebvre et al. capitalized on a data-sharing
initiative, the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE)
consortium (4), to overcome the power limitations from small
sample sizes evident in prior studies. Using a subset of this
large sample (N 5 694) gave the study sufﬁcient power to
identify even a weak effect, yet they found no evidence of
diminished callosal size in ASD. This ﬁnding is largely corroborated by another large recent study showing only a weak
effect in a speciﬁc portion of the corpus callosum (5). If there is
reduced connectivity in ASD, it is not manifest in reduced size
of the corpus callosum.
In providing compelling negative ﬁndings, Lefebvre et al. (1)
help us to focus our search on the possibilities for positive
ﬁndings. First, it may be that the corpus callosum in particular
and gross white matter volume in general are simply too
coarse a measure and that the structural signature of atypical
connectivity in ASD resides in the microstructure of axons.
This question could be addressed by focusing on the histologic study of postmortem brains or on different kinds of
imaging methods, such as diffusion imaging (Figure 1). However, it is possible that measures based on structural connectivity may be too insensitive, and we should be looking
more closely at the phenotype: functional connectivity. Indeed,
studies of functional connectivity in ASD are now more
common than studies of structural connectivity, but no clear
picture has yet emerged here either. Recent work suggested
that functional connectivity is atypical in ASD, but in ways that
are both idiosyncratic and heterogeneous across individuals
(6), a pattern that also recently emerged in neural activation
studies using complex stimuli (7) and that may represent a
general principle of the condition. This heterogeneity would
make it more difﬁcult to ﬁnd group differences on a single
structural measure and highlights the need for more nuanced
analysis of individual variations to ﬁnd the most salient
connections between brain and behavior. Finally, the negative
ﬁndings in the present study apply only to individuals 7.5–40
years old, leaving open the possibility that structural abnormalities of the corpus callosum may be present and detectable
earlier in development (8,9) but become less apparent later
in life.
The study by Lefebvre et al. (1) also is valuable in raising
numerous speciﬁc methodologic considerations. First, studies of

SEE CORRESPONDING ARTICLE ON PAGE 126
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.002
ISSN: 0006-3223

& 2015 Society of Biological Psychiatry
81
Biological Psychiatry July 15, 2015; 78:81–82 www.sobp.org/journal

Biological
Psychiatry

Commentary

ﬁndings that happened to achieve the “magical” p , .05
threshold. The problems inherent in this kind of reporting are
by now well known but unfortunately not yet eliminated.
A p value is among the least reliable metrics we can report,
so much so that some journals recommend dispensing with it
altogether (10). If a question is important and the research is
done carefully, it should be irrelevant whether the ﬁnding is
deemed “statistically signiﬁcant” or not. So-called negative
ﬁndings can be as informative as positive ﬁndings and help to
narrow our search for causal explanations of psychiatric
illness. The study by Lefebvre et al. (1) provides a patent
demonstration of the value of this approach.

Acknowledgments and Disclosures
This work was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health Grant
Nos. K99MH094409 and R00MH094409 (DPK); a National Alliance for
Research on Schizophrenia and Depression Young Investigator Award from
the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation (DPK), Simons Foundation
Grant No. SFARI-07-01 (RA), and National Institute of Mental Health Conte
Center Grant No. P50MH094258 (RA).
The authors report no biomedical ﬁnancial interests or potential conﬂicts
of interest.

Article Information

Figure 1. Examples of two types of magnetic resonance imaging–based
structural images of the corpus callosum. (A) T1-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging can be used to quantify cross-sectional area, volume, and morphology of the corpus callosum. (B) Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging can
provide more detailed information about microstructural properties (e.g., white
matter ﬁber orientation [indicated by different colors] and organization). (Images
courtesy of Mike Tyszka, California Institute of Technology.)

From the Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences (DPK), Indiana
University, Bloomington, Indiana; and Divisions of Humanities and Social
Sciences (LKP, RA) and Biology (RA), California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California.
Address correspondence to Daniel P. Kennedy, Ph.D., Department of
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street,
Bloomington, IN 47405; E-mail: dpk@indiana.edu.
Received May 1, 2015; accepted May 2, 2015.

References
1.

callosal size must consider variations in brain volume in the most
effective manner. Although there is a robust relationship between
the size of the corpus callosum and brain size across and within
mammalian species (including humans), the correlation is nonlinear—as a result, larger brains have proportionally smaller
corpora callosa. Based on simulations, the authors conclude
that owing to this nonlinearity, brain volume is more accurately
controlled through covariation rather than normalization.
The second consideration relates to presumptions about
potential confounds. Carefully matching ASD and control groups
on IQ is typical to ensure that observed group differences cannot
simply be explained by differences in IQ. However, Lefebvre et al.
(1) found a weaker correlation between verbal IQ and brain
volume in the ASD group, and therefore matching groups on IQ
may introduce unintended artifactual differences in callosal size.
In short, controlling for potentially confounding covariates sometimes can create spurious group differences.
There is perhaps an even more important message from the
study by Lefebvre et al. (1). Despite their failure to ﬁnd
abnormal callosal size in such a large sample with ASD, the
authors also conducted a meta-analysis of prior studies, of
which more than half reported signiﬁcant reductions in callosal
size. All of those prior studies were vastly underpowered in
sample size, and from the pattern of publications it is also
apparent that there was a strong bias to publish studies with

82

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Biological Psychiatry July 15, 2015; 78:81–82 www.sobp.org/journal

Lefebvre A, Beggiato A, Bourgeron T, Toro R (2015): Neuroanatomical
diversity of corpus callosum and brain volume in autism: Metaanalysis, analysis of the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange project,
and simulation. Biol Psychiatry 78:126–134.
Geschwind DH, Levitt P (2007): Autism spectrum disorders: Developmental disconnection syndromes. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:103–111.
Paul LK, Corsello C, Kennedy DP, Adolphs R (2014): Agenesis of the
corpus callosum and autism: A comprehensive comparison. Brain
137:1813–1829.
Di Martino A, Li Q, Yan C-G, Denio E, Castellanos FX, Alaerts K, et al.
(2014): The Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange: Toward a largescale evaluation of the intrinsic brain architecture in autism. Mol
Psychiatry 19:659–667.
Haar S, Berman S, Behrmann M, Dinstein I (2014): Anatomical
abnormalities in autism? [published online ahead of print Oct 14].
Cereb Cortex.
Hahamy A, Behrmann M, Malach R (2015): The idiosyncratic brain:
Distortion of spontaneous connectivity patterns in autism spectrum
disorder. Nature Neurosci 2:302–309.
Byrge L, Dubois J, Tyszka JM, Adolphs R, Kennedy DP (2015):
Idiosyncratic brain activation patterns are associated with poor social
comprehension in autism. J Neurosci 35:5837–5850.
Wolff JJ, Gerig G, Lewis JD, et al. (2015): Altered corpus callosum
morphology associated with autism over the ﬁrst two years of life
[published online ahead of print May 3]. Brain.
Nordahl CW, Iosif A-M, Young GS, Perry LM, Dougherty R, Lee A, Li D,
Buonocore MH, et al. (2015): Sex differences in the corpus callosum in
preschool-aged children with autism spectrum disorder. Mol Autism 6:26.
Cumming G (2014): The new statistics: Why and how. Psychol Sci 25:
7–29.

