Dysconnection of functional network in Schizophrenia: a
ROI-based model approach
Yi-Hui Lin (林宜慧) , Jiun-Yan Huang(黃俊燕)
Department of Bioinformatics, Chung Hua University, Hsin Chu 30012, Taiwan, R.O.C

Introduction
Schizophrenia is a mental disorder, the core symptoms include hallucinations,
delusions and nonsense. It is generally believed that structure of functional network
concerns with the illness of Schizophrenia. In the previous study, the disconnection and
abrupted small world property of functional network was found in Schizophrenia
patients[1].
To estimate the brain functional network, the popular approach is using fMRI to
collect the time course data. Two brain regions will be functionally linked if their
correlation coefficient between time course data is higher than a given threshold,
otherwise it is functionally disconnected. However, the node definition for the
functional network is pivotal to the study of functional network structure. Usually, there
are two ways to define nodes, one is model-based method. Several regions of
interest(ROIs) are selected as definition of nodes, the structure of functional network
depends on which ROIs are selected. The alternative is model free method, one uses
clustering, Independent component analysis(ICA), and etc. to parcellate whole brain
into several synchronous regions. The synchronous regions are defined as nodes in
functional network. The short coming of model free method is the results depends on
external stimuli of the brain.
Here, we adopt two ROI-based models of functional network, and systematic
compare the consistency of the results for the three models.

Methods and Results
Two ROI-based models with 10,22 and 160 ROIs respectively were adopted in this
study[1,2,3]. The time series fMRI data of Schizophrenia patients and healthy control
was downloaded from the COBRE dataset in International Neuroimaging data-sharing
Initiative(INDI, http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/). The COBRE dataset contains 72
patients with Schizophrenia and 75 healthy controls,and ages ranging from 18 to 65 in
each group (TR:2s,TE:29ms,matrix size:64x64, 33slices)[4].
The preprocessing of fMRI data was done by SPM8(Statistical Parametric Mapping,
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). The preprocess arranges in order of smooth, slice
timing correction, head movement correction, and normalization to MNI template. After
preprocessing step, we use REST(Resting State fMRI data analysis Toolkit,

http://www.nitrc.org/projects/rest) to calculate the brain’s functional network. The
functional networks for Schizophrenia and Healthy control were compared by t test
after Fisher’s Z transformation. The P value was adjusted by Bonferroni correction and
False Discovery Rate(FDR).
In addition, the calculation of a network characteristics, including degree, clustering
coefficient,betweenness,etc.,to prove that the network link changes.

Discussion
The disconnectivity of functional network for several ROIs was found in
schizophrenia. The disconnections in middle and superior left temporal and right
posterior cingulum were also found. The mainly missing and few rewiring of
connections cause the abruption of functional network in Schizophrenia.

Figure 1. (a) The adjacency matrix between 10 ROIs for healthy controls.(b)The Pvalue of the adjacency matrix for healthy controls.(c) The adjacency matrix between 10
ROIs for Schizophrenia patients.(d) The P-value of the adjacency matrix in
Schizophrenia.

References
1

Irina R.,Guillermo C.,Benjamin T., et al. (2013) Schizophrenia as a Network Disease: Disruption of
Emergent Brain Function in Patients with Auditory Hallucinations.PLoS ONE 8(1):e50625

2

Plaze M, Bartrs-Faz D, Martinot J, et al. (2006) Left superior temporal gyrus activation during
sentence perception negatively correlates with auditory hallucination severity in schizophrenia
patients. Schizophrenia Research 87, 109–115.

3

Nico U. F. Dosenbach, Binyam N., Alexander L. Cohen, Damien A. Fair, et al.(2010) Prediction of
Individual Brain Maturity Using fMRI. Published 10 September 2010, Science 329, 1358.

4

International Neuroimaging data-sharing Initiative, COBRE dataset.
( http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/retro/cobre.html)

