bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Title: Enhancing the precision of our understanding about mentalizing in adults with autism
Authors: Michael V. Lombardo1,2,3*, Meng-Chuan Lai3,4,5*, Bonnie Auyeung3,6, Rosemary J.
Holt3, Carrie Allison3, Paula Smith3, Bhismadev Chakrabarti3,7, Amber N. V. Ruigrok3, John
Suckling8, Edward T. Bullmore8, MRC AIMS Consortium**, Christine Ecker9, Michael C.
Craig9,10, Declan G. M. Murphy9, Francesca Happé11, & Simon Baron-Cohen3
Affiliations:
1
Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
2
Center for Applied Neuroscience, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
3
Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
4
Child and Youth Mental Health Collaborative at The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
and The Hospital for Sick Children, and Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada
5
Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital and College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan
6
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, Department of Psychology,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
7
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, School of Psychology & Clinical
Language Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, UK
8
Brain Mapping Unit, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
9
Sackler Institute for Translational Neurodevelopment, Department of Forensic and
Neurodevelopmental Sciences, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's
College London, London, UK
10
National Autism Unit, Bethlem Royal Hospital, SLAM NHS Foundation Trust, UK
11
MRC Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK
* Equal contributions
** The Medical Research Council Autism Imaging Multicentre Study Consortium (MRC AIMS Consortium) is a
UK collaboration between the Institute of Psychiatry (IoP) at King’s College, London, the Autism Research Centre,
University of Cambridge, and the Autism Research Group, University of Oxford. The Consortium members are in
alphabetical order: Anthony J. Bailey (Oxford), Simon Baron-Cohen (Cambridge), Patrick F. Bolton (IoP), Edward
T. Bullmore (Cambridge), Sarah Carrington (Oxford), Marco Catani (IoP), Bhismadev Chakrabarti (Cambridge),
Michael C. Craig (IoP), Eileen M. Daly (IoP), Sean C. L. Deoni (IoP), Christine Ecker (IoP), Francesca Happé
(IoP), Julian Henty (Cambridge), Peter Jezzard (Oxford), Patrick Johnston (IoP), Derek K. Jones (IoP), Meng-Chuan
Lai (Cambridge), Michael V. Lombardo (Cambridge), Anya Madden (IoP), Diane Mullins (IoP), Clodagh M.
Murphy (IoP), Declan G. M. Murphy (IoP), Greg Pasco (Cambridge), Amber N. V. Ruigrok (Cambridge), Susan A.
Sadek (Cambridge), Debbie Spain (IoP), Rose Stewart (Oxford), John Suckling (Cambridge), Sally J. Wheelwright
(Cambridge), Steven C. Williams (IoP), and C. Ellie Wilson (IoP).

1

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Difficulties in mentalizing or theory of mind are common autism spectrum conditions (ASC).
However, heterogeneity in mentalizing ability between individuals with ASC is considerable,
particularly in adulthood. Parsing this heterogeneity to come to more precise understanding of
which individuals have difficulty has important implications, particularly for individualized
approaches in clinical and translational research applications. Here we utilize unsupervised
hierarchical clustering to identify data-driven subgroups within ASC based on performance on an
advanced mentalizing test, the ‘Reading the Mind in the Eyes’ Test (RMET). We find evidence
for 2 discrete ASC subgroups that can be replicably identified across two large independent
datasets. The first subgroup shows clear difficulty on the RMET, with an effect size difference
compared to typically-developing controls (TD) of greater than 3 standard deviations. In
contrast, the second subgroup shows little to no difficulty on the RMET compared to TD
individuals. These ASC subgroups are not systematically different across a range of other
variables including sex/gender, age, depression or anxiety symptoms, autistic traits, trait
empathy, and autism symptom severity. Verbal IQ is slightly lower in the impaired ASC
subgroup, but covarying for this does not change the effect of large difficulties in mentalizing in
this subgroup. These insights enable a more precise understanding of mentalizing and may have
important implications for future work that takes a more individualized approach to clinical
assessment and treatment. Identification of these subgroups may also facilitate work examining
multiple biological mechanisms underlying ASC in translational research.

2

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

For the last 30 years we have understood that there are profound early developmental
difficulties in theory of mind/mentalizing (henceforth ‘mentalizing’) in autism spectrum
conditions (henceforth ASC) 1. This led to the mindblindness theory of ASC, which is one of the
primary cognitive explanations behind the social-communicative difficulties that are hallmarks
of ASC 2-4. Since then, the literature on this topic has expanded considerably. For example,
rather than lacking such ability altogether, there is evidence to support the idea that rudimentary
explicit mentalizing ability enabling one to pass standard false belief test can develop in ASC,
albeit at a much delayed rate over the lifespan 5. Alongside such achievements in developing
rudimentary explicit mentalizing skills comes enhanced everyday adaptive social behavior where
mentalizing is a necessity 4. Furthermore, there are distinctions between explicit versus
implicit/automatic mentalizing processes, with the latter continuing to be atypical much later in
life despite the individual possessing explicit abilities 6. Mentalizing can also be integrated with
known difficulties in the domain of self-referential cognition 7-14. Underlying mindblindness,
there are also distinct neural mechanisms for mentalizing that are affected in ASC (e.g., 15-22;
though also see 23). These findings have generally been informative in furthering our
understanding of mentalizing difficulties in ASC and for thinking about it as a theory behind the
cardinal social-communicative difficulties.
Despite all these considerable strides forward in understanding mentalizing in ASC, some
critical barriers remain in terms of the ‘precision’ of our understanding on the topic. Most, if not
all, the evidence to date is based on statistical evidence about what differs on-average between
an ASC group and a non-ASC comparison group. However, as we have come to learn over the
history of studying ASC, heterogeneity is the rule, not the exception 24-26. This means that it
should come as no surprise that mentalizing is also affected by the heterogeneity within ASC.
Many individuals will show evidence of some kind of deficit in mentalizing, while others may
not show any difficulty or may simply mask the difficulty via compensatory mechanisms 6, 27.
This heterogeneity will also likely change throughout development as individuals on the
spectrum acquire more competence in the domain 5. Exemplifying these ideas about
heterogeneity in the domain of mentalizing, a recent study by Byrge and colleagues examined
inter-subject correlations in fMRI BOLD response during naturalistic viewing of videos
displaying high levels of social awkwardness. This study found that group-differences in a
standard case-control comparison were entirely driven by 5 outlier ASC individuals with
idiosyncratic patterns of response 28. These 5 individuals also showed behavioral deficits in the
domain of mentalizing (i.e. reduced social comprehension, understanding of motivations,
thoughts and feelings). This result directly reflects the fact that heterogeneity will always be
present in typical case-control studies and that interpretation and replication of such studies may
be challenging without knowing a priori what types of heterogeneous mixtures of ASC
individuals are present in any one sample.

3

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

It is clear that we must move beyond omnibus statements about on-average statistical
effects of group differences, towards a more ‘precise’ understanding of heterogeneity that can
allow for more individualized approaches 29, 30. A move towards more precision in understanding
individual differences in mentalizing can also be of large relevance for clinical practice and
translational research. For instance, such an approach would enable work to proceed toward the
goals envisioned by the personalized medicine initiative (e.g., individualized treatment
evaluation, more precise prognostic predictions). Furthermore, top-down approaches to parsing
heterogeneity at the level of cognitive subtypes may also lead to important discoveries regarding
differing biology or other types of compensatory mechanisms 25, 31.
In the current study we utilize an advanced mentalizing test (the ‘Reading the Mind in the
Eyes’ Test; RMET) on adults with ASC to subgroup patients based on different profiles of
performance on the test. The RMET is widely used as a core instrument for assessing difficulties
in the social cognitive domain of understanding other minds, and its prominence has even
warranted its listing as a core instrument in this domain within the NIMH RDoC
(http://1.usa.gov/1Qs6MdI). The RMET is also widely utilized as a treatment outcome measure
(e.g., 32-35). Given that inconsistency exists behind findings from mentalizing-based treatments
for ASC 36 and the tacit understanding that heterogeneity in treatment response is highly likely, it
is critical to further our understanding of how mentalizing heterogeneity manifests in ASC,
particularly on the RMET, and whether such insights can help in better trial design and/or in
individualizing interpretations about who may benefit from such treatments.
Here we use RMET item-level response data as input into unsupervised hierarchical
clustering to identify data-driven subgroups. This approach is novel with respect to how the
RMET is traditionally analyzed as it utilizes the full spectrum of information contained across
responses to all RMET items and does not rely on the traditional procedure of summing scores
across items. We show that this approach can identify replicable data-driven discrete subgroups
of adults with ASC. We also go further to characterize potential differences between RMET
ASC subgroups on other measures such as sex/gender, verbal IQ (VIQ), autistic traits (using the
Autism Spectrum Quotient, AQ), trait empathy (using the Empathy Quotient, EQ), depression
and anxiety symptoms (using the Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories, BDI and BAI), as
well as gold standard autism diagnostic instruments (i.e. Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule, ADOS; Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised, ADI-R).
Materials and Methods
Discovery Dataset and Participant Characteristics
In this study we analyzed two large datasets that served as discovery and replication sets.
The discovery dataset came from the Cambridge Autism Research Database (CARD) 37 and

4

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

consisted of 395 adults with ASC (178 males, 217 females) and 320 typically-developing
controls (TD; 152 males, 168 females) within the age range of 18-74 years. The CARD data
were
collected
online
from
two
websites
(www.autismresearchcentre.com,
www.cambridgepsychology.com) during the period of 2007-2014. Once participants had logged
onto either site, they consented for their data to be held in the Cambridge Autism Research
Database (CARD) for research use, with ethical approval from the University of Cambridge
Psychology Research Ethics Committee (reference No. Pre.2013.06).
CARD participants who self-reported a clinical autism diagnosis were asked specific
information about the date of their diagnosis, where they were diagnosed, and the profession of
the person who diagnosed them. The inclusion criterion for participants in the autism group was
a clinical diagnosis of an autism spectrum condition (ASC) according to DSM-IV (any pervasive
developmental disorder), DSM-5 (autism spectrum disorder), or ICD-10 (any pervasive
developmental disorder) from a recognized specialist clinic by a psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist. Such online self/parent-reported diagnoses agree well with clinical diagnoses in
medical records 38. Control group participants were included if they had no diagnoses of ASC,
and no first-degree relatives with ASC. For both groups, participants were excluded if they
reported a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, eating disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, personality disorder, epilepsy, or an intersex/transsexual condition. Participants with a
diagnosis of depression or anxiety were not excluded as these conditions are common in the
general population and occur at high rates in adults with autism 24.
Replication Dataset and Participant Characteristics
The replication dataset consisted of participants from the MRC AIMS Consortium dataset
(n=123 ASC; 85 male, 38 female; n=128 TD; 87 male, 41 female) within the age range of 185239. The study was given ethical approval by the National Research Ethics Committee, Suffolk,
UK. All volunteers gave written informed consent. Participants were recruited and assessed at
one of the three MRC AIMS centers: the Institute of Psychiatry, London; the Autism Research
Centre, University of Cambridge; the Autism Research Group, University of Oxford. All
participants were right-handed. Exclusion criteria for all participants included a history of major
psychiatric disorder (with the exception of major depressive or anxiety disorders), head injury,
genetic disorder associated with autism (e.g., fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis), or any
other medical condition affecting brain function (e.g., epilepsy). All ASC participants were
diagnosed with ASC according to ICD-10 research criteria. ASC diagnoses were confirmed
using the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) 40 and it was allowed for participants to
be 1 point below cutoff for one of the three ADI-R domains in the diagnostic algorithm. The
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) 41, was used to assess current symptoms for
all participants with ASC. The Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) 42 was used
to assess Verbal IQ (VIQ), Performance IQ (PIQ) and Full Scale IQ (FSIQ). Depression and

5

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

anxiety symptoms were also measured with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and Beck
Anxiety Inventory (BAI).
Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test (RMET)
All participants in both discovery and replication datasets completed the ‘Reading the Mind in
the Eyes’ Test (RMET). The RMET 43 consists of 36 items of grey-scale photos cropped and
rescaled so that only the area around the eyes can be seen. Each photo is surrounded by four
mental state terms and the participant is instructed to choose the word that best describes what
the person in the photo is thinking or feeling. Participants in both discovery and replication
datasets completed a computerized online version of the RMET at home. Participants were
instructed to select the most appropriate item within 20 seconds for each stimulus (presented in
random order). Responses were coded as correct or incorrect (wrong items selected, or no
response after 20 seconds), giving a maximum total correct score of 36. To guard against the
possibility that many items timed-out, we used a rule that if an individual had time-outs on 9 or
more items (>25% of all items), then such individuals were excluded from analysis. All
participants in both discovery and replication datasets also completed the Autism Spectrum
Quotient (AQ) 44 and the Empathy Quotient (EQ) 45 on the same online platform and before
taking the RMET.
Statistical Analysis
Subgrouping was achieved using agglomerative hierarchical clustering on a data matrix
of binary values (1 for correct, 0 for incorrect) with the dimensions of rows specifying subjects
and columns specifying RMET items. These analyses were performed using the clustergram.m
function within the Bioinformatics Toolbox of MATLAB R2015a, which performs clustering
both on the rows (i.e. subjects) and columns (i.e. RMET items) of the data matrix. Ward’s metric
was used as the linkage method across both subjects and RMET items. The distance metric
applied to both rows and columns was the Hamming distance and is operationalized as the
percentage of items between individuals that differ and is appropriate for the context of binary
data. To determine the number of subgroups present along the subject dimension, we used two
separate cluster validity indices to evaluate the optimal number of clusters; pseudot2 and
silhouette. The pseudot2 indice is only applicable for hierarchical clustering methods 46 and is
implemented within the NbClust library in R 47. For our purposes, we translated the R code from
NbClust into MATLAB code in order to accommodate utilization of the Hamming distance
metric we have applied in our analyses. The silhouette indice 48 is a measure of how similar a
particular subject is with its own cluster compared subjects from other clusters. Silhouette values
ranges from -1 to 1 and high silhouette values indicate that subjects within a cluster are well
matched (i.e. highly similar) to that cluster and are poorly matched to other clusters. The optimal
number of clusters is the cluster solution with the highest silhouette value. This method is

6

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

implemented within the MATLAB function evalclusters.m. To test for the consistency of such
optimal cluster solutions, we used bootstrapping (1000 resamples) to examine the frequency with
which the observed optimal cluster solution occurred.
To test the idea that unsupervised stratification of individuals in one dataset will lead to
robust replicable detection of individuals within the same subgroups in a second independent
dataset, we used a linear support vector machine (SVM) classifier implemented within LIBSVM
(https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm/). The ASC Impaired subgroup was set to class 1 and
the combination of ASC Unimpaired and TD individuals was set to class 2. The regularization
parameter, C, was set to the default of 1. Because of the imbalance in class size (more ASC
Unimpaired and TD individuals than ASC Impaired), we used a class-weighting scheme
whereby class 1 was weighted as 1/n1 and class 2 was weighted as 1/n2, where n1 and n2 are the
sizes of each class. We used two-fold cross-validation whereby on fold 1, the discovery set
(CARD) was the training set and the replication set (AIMS) the test set. Fold 2 reversed this
order (i.e., AIMS as training, CARD as test) and performance metrics of accuracy, sensitivity
and specificity were averaged across the folds to get a final estimate of performance.
Permutation tests (10,000 permutations) were implemented to compare observed performance
levels against performance levels observed under the null distribution and to compute p-values
for each performance metric.
Once ASC subgroups were defined, we computed total RMET scores (i.e. sum across all
items) for each individual and ran independent samples t-tests to specifically compare the total
score in ASC subgroups to the TD group. These t-statistics were also used to compute replication
Bayes Factor (BF) statistics to quantify strength of evidence for replication (BF ~1 indicates little
to no evidence supporting replication, BF>10 indicates strong evidence for replication, BF>100
indicates extremely strong evidence for replication). These replication BF statistics are computed
with code accompanying a recent paper by Verhagen and Wagenmakers 49 (see here for R code:
http://bit.ly/1GHiPRe).
We also examined other variables such as sex/gender, VIQ, age, AQ, EQ, BDI, BAI, and
ADOS and ADI-R subscales to test hypotheses about whether the subgroups would differ on
these variables. To test for the possibility of imbalances across the subgroups as a function of
sex/gender, we counted up the number of males and females across all subgroups and compared
them to expected counts derived from a chi-square test. To test VIQ, age, AQ, EQ, BDI, BAI,
ADOS, and ADI-R score differences we used independent samples t-tests to compare measures
between ASC subgroups. Given that VIQ emerged as significantly different across the
subgroups, we re-ran statistical tests evaluating RMET between-group differences compared to
TD with VIQ as a covariate. This test was implemented using the glmfit.m function in
MATLAB.

7

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
Clustering of the ASC group within the discovery dataset (CARD) is shown in Fig 1A.
Two distinct ASC subgroups emerged as the two main branches of the dendrogram and this twocluster solution was confirmed by both the pseudot2 and silhouette cluster validity indices.
Similarly in the replication dataset (AIMS), there was also evidence of two distinct ASC
subgroups again confirmed as the optimal number of clusters by both pseudot2 and silhouette
cluster validity indices (Fig 1B). Bootstrapping to examine the consistency of these two-cluster
solutions showed that they were the predominant solution across 1000 bootstrap resamples
(percentage of bootstrap resamples with a two-cluster solution: Discovery pseudot2 = 100%;
Discovery silhouette = 100%; Replication pseudot2 = 100%; Replication silhouette = 59%).
These results indicate that adults with ASC can be stratified into at least 2 subgroups, which can
be generally characterized as ‘Impaired’ and ‘Unimpaired’ mentalizing subgroups. The
‘Impaired’ subgroup comprised about 15% of ASC cases in the discovery set and 33% of ASC
cases in the replication set, and could be descriptively characterized as showing a large
proportion of incorrect items across all subjects (indicated in Fig 1 as black cells within the
clustergrams representing data across all subjects and items). The ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup
comprised 85% of ASC cases in the discovery set and 67% of ASC cases in the replication set,
and could be descriptively characterized as showing a large number of correct items across all
subjects (indicated in Fig 1 as red cells within the clustergrams representing data across all
subjects and items).
A

C

Discovery Dataset (CARD)
Subject-by-Item Clustergram

Subject Distance Matrix

Discovery Dataset (CARD)
Subject-by-Item Clustergram

Subject Distance Matrix

ASC
Impaired

ASC
Unimpaired

B

Subjects

Subjects

TD

RMET Items

Hamming Distance

Similar

RMET Items

Dissimilar

D

Replication Dataset (AIMS)
Subject-by-Item Clustergram

Subject Distance Matrix

Subject-by-Item Clustergram

ASC
Impaired

Dissimilar

Subject Distance Matrix

Subjects

TD

Subjects

ASC
Unimpaired

Hamming Distance

Similar

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

RMET Items

Similar

Hamming Distance

RMET Items

Dissimilar

Similar

Hamming Distance

Dissimilar

Fig. 1: Clustering individuals and RMET items across discovery and replication datasets. This
figure shows clustergrams (i.e. two-way hierarchical clustering across subjects (rows) and
8

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

RMET items (columns)) and distance matrices for both ASC (A, C) and TD (B, D) groups in the
discovery (A, C) and replication (B, D) datasets (ASC Impaired, blue; ASC Unimpaired, red;
TD, green). Within the clustergrams, the cells colored in black denote RMET items where the
response was incorrect, whereas cells colored in red denote items where the response was
correct. To the right of the subject-by-item clustergrams are distance matrices depicted as a heat
map. These distance matrices show the Hamming distance between all subjects. The rows and
columns of the distance matrices are ordered in the same way as the dendrogram for
hierarchical clustering. The color values indicate similarity between subjects with cool colors
indicating high similarity whereas hot colors indicate high dissimilarity.
Using classification analyses we were able to test the idea that such subgroups are
replicable, since training on such subgroup distinctions in one dataset should lead to
generalizable accurate predictions of subgroup membership in an independent dataset. A linear
SVM classifier performs with 92.16% accuracy (p = 0.0012), 89.05% sensitivity (p = 0.0077),
and 92.89% specificity (p = 2.99e-4) for distinguishing the ASC Impaired subgroup from all
other individuals (ASC Unimpaired and TD). Similarly, if one ignores the TD data completely
and only focuses on the distinction between ASD Impaired versus ASD Unimpaired,
performance was also high (Accuracy = 89.54%, p = 3.99e-4; Sensitivity = 88.66%, p = 4.99e-4;
Specificity = 90.49%, p = 1.99e-4).
Underscoring these analyses, we have also computed dissimilarity between-subjects on a
within- or between-dataset basis. These results can be seen in Fig 2. In Fig 2C, we show the
critical comparisons of how similarity in RMET item-level responses are higher within ASC
subgroup but across datasets compared to between ASC subgroups within the same dataset.
Here, we computed the average between-subject distance for each subject in relation to all other
subjects in different datasets and subgroups. The idea here is that between-subject distance
should be smaller within-subgroup but across dataset (i.e. subsets 5 and 6) than when comparing
between-subject distance between-subgroups but within the same dataset (i.e. subsets 7 and 8).
The effect size difference for all of these comparisons (i.e. subset 5 vs 7 or 8 and subset 6 vs 7 or
8) was always greater than 0.8, indicating indeed that at a quantitative level there is much
similarity in RMET item-level responses within individuals of the same subgroup, even when
looking across different datasets.

9

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 2: Quantification of between-subject dissimilarity in RMET item-level responses within
ASC subgroups and between datasets. Panel A shows a dissimilarity matrix of Hamming
Distance for all ASC subjects across Discovery and Replication datasets. The subgroups within
each dataset are demarcated with the black outlines. Cells outside of the black outlines depict
between-subject dissimilarity (i.e. Hamming distance) across subgroups and datasets. Panel B
shows color and number markings for each subset of data shown in Panel C. Panel C shows the
mean between-subject dissimilarity computed on an individual subject basis. This means each
dot in panel C represents how that one individual on-average differs from all other individuals
within a particular subset. The critical comparisons showing that RMET item-level responses
are more similar within ASC subgroup across datasets than across ASC subgroups but within
the same dataset are subsets 5 and 6 compared to subsets 7 and 8. Comparing subsets 5 or 6 to
7 or 8 yields an effect size greater than Cohen’s d = 0.8.
Clustering on the TD group across both datasets also resulted in two-cluster solutions
across both pseudot2 and silhouette cluster validity indices, and these two-cluster solutions were
highly consistent across bootstrap resamples (96-100%) (see Supplementary Figure 1). However,
the clusters across each dataset appeared different. Within the discovery dataset, the two TD
subgroups appeared to be different in terms of overall correct/incorrect scores, with one of the
subgroups scoring lower than the other (t(314) = -12.24, p = 1.86e-28, Cohen’s d = 1.42). In
contrast, within the replication dataset, the two TD subgroups were not different in total scores
(t(124) = -1.50, p = 0.13, Cohen’s d = 0.27), which indicates that the primary difference between
the subgroups is one of different patterning of response across RMET items, but with no overall

10

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

effect on total RMET score. Confirming the idea that the TD subgroups across datasets are
different, an SVM classifier trained on one dataset to predict individuals in subgroups from the
other dataset performed poorly (Accuracy = 53.95%, Sensitivity = 58.21%, Specificity =
49.98%). Because there was no clear replicable distinction across datasets for these TD
subgroups, we defaulted on a one-cluster solution (i.e., no clear subgroup distinction) in all
further analyses that compare TD to ASC subgroups (Fig 1C-D). However, this does not imply
that subgroups don’t exist within the TD population. Rather, it may simply be that our sample
sizes in each dataset are too small to pick up on subtle replicable subgroup differentiation.
Given the robust presence of ASC subgroups, we next compared these subgroups to TD
using RMET summary scores. These tests allow us to examine how the subgroups compare to
TD in mentalizing ability. Here we find that the ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup was not differentiated
from the TD group in the discovery set (Discovery: t(634) = 0.13, p = 0.89, Cohen’s d = 0.01)
and this effect replicates in the replication set (Replication: t(207) = -5.51, p = 4.22e-7, Cohen’s
d = 0.73; BF = 16.16). Note that the replication Bayes Factor (BF) was greater than 10, which
generally indicates strong evidence in favor of replication. Since there was no effect in the
discovery set, this BF can be interpreted as replication of no true difference. However, one
caveat to keep in mind is that the dataset showing little to no impairment (i.e. discovery) is a
dataset where ASC diagnosis is self-reported and verification of such diagnosis was not possible.
In contrast, the dataset where ASC diagnosis is validated with gold-standard instruments, we do
see some evidence of reduced scores in this subgroup. Therefore, a cautious and perhaps
conservative interpretation of this subgroup would be to describe it as an ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup
because of the lack of replicable evidence of difficulty in mentalizing, but to also state that a
better test of replication would likely be on two datasets with similar and strict criteria for
inclusion of ASC individuals.
In contrast to the ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup, the ‘Impaired’ subgroup showed massively
reduced performance on the RMET compared to the TD group, with the effect size being greater
than 3 standard deviations in both datasets (Discovery: t(372) = -21.39, p = 8.40e-67, Cohen’s d
= 3.05; Replication: t(164) = -18.47, p = 6.27e-42, Cohen’s d = 3.35). Furthermore, this effect
was highly replicable across datasets (BF = 7.40e+39), albeit again with a similar pattern of the
effect size of the replication set being larger than that of the discovery set. We further tested
whether this effect of reduced RMET scores in the Impaired group would remain in the
Replication set after covarying for sex/gender, age, center, and VIQ. After controlling for these
factors, RMET scores were still reduced in the ASC Impaired subgroup versus the TD group
(t(159) = -17.25; p = 2.91e-38) and retained evidence for replicability (BF = 6.73e+36). These
results indicate that our subgrouping strategy effectively enhances sensitivity for highlighting a
subgroup with impaired mentalizing ability in adulthood and also increases specificity by
showing that only one ASC subgroup is impaired while the other subgroup shows intact
mentalizing ability.

11

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Within each dataset, it would not be statistically appropriate to compare the Impaired vs
Unimpaired ASC subgroups directly, since the selection process of clustering subgroups and the
subsequent hypothesis test are both done on the same data 50, 51. However, we can compare the
Impaired subgroup from one dataset to the Unimpaired subgroup from a separate independent
dataset, because here the selection process is independent of the hypothesis test. Comparing the
discovery set ‘Impaired’ subgroup to the replication set ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup, we found that
the Impaired subgroup showed massively reduced performance on the RMET (t(139) = -18.05, p
= 2.83e-38, Cohen’s d = 3.09). Conversely, comparison of the discovery ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup
with replication ‘Impaired’ subgroup also indicated massively reduced scores in the ‘Impaired’
subgroup (t(358) = 16.04, p = 5.02e-44, Cohen’s d = 2.69). Computation of a replication Bayes
Factor indicated that this effect was highly replicable (BF = 1.24e+36).
To further facilitate visualization of these subgroups and how such a subgrouping
approach parsimoniously breaks down the variability within an omnibus ASC group, we have
plotted summary scores for the ASC subgroups separately in Fig 3A-B and again in Fig 3C-D
when the ASC individuals are combined as one omnibus group. It is clear from these plots that
these subgroups cannot be simply derived by using a hard threshold on RMET summary scores,
and this illustrates how the subgrouping approach via hierarchical clustering of item-level
responses on the RMET can go beyond limitations apparent when one utilizes summary scores
alone. Also of note is the enhanced sensitivity of documenting mentalizing difficulties in ASC,
when ASC Impaired is compared to TD versus when the omnibus ASC group is compared to
TD.
A

Discovery Dataset (CARD)

C

Discovery Dataset (CARD)
Cohen’s d = 0.36

Cohen’s d = 3.05

B

Cohen’s d = 0.01

ASC
Impaired

B

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

TD

ASC

D

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

Cohen’s d = 3.35

Cohen’s d = 1.15

Cohen’s d = 0.73

ASC
Impaired

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

ASC

TD

12

Fig. 3: RMET total scores across
subgroups in discovery and
replication datasets. RMET total
scores are shown as boxplots along
with dots representing individual
data points in discovery (A, C) and
replication (B, D) datasets (ASC
Impaired, blue; ASC Unimpaired,
red; TD, green). Panels A and B
show the data when subgroups are
separated while panels C and D
show the data when ASC is treated
as one omnibus group.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Examination of other variables such as sex/gender, age, autistic traits, trait empathy,
depression and anxiety symptoms, and autism symptom severity showed no signs of consistent
differentiation across ASC subgroups (see the supplementary text and figures). However, it is
noteworthy that within the Discovery dataset, there was evidence for higher autistic traits on the
AQ and lower trait empathy on the EQ (Supplementary Figures 5A and 6A). Aside from these
other measures, the only other measure showing signs of differentiation amongst the subgroups
was VIQ. VIQ was reduced in the ASC Impaired subgroup compared to the ASC Unimpaired
and TD groups. This effect of reduced VIQ in the ASC Impaired subgroup did not change the
main inferences with regards to ASC Impaired showing reduced RMET total scores, as shown by
the earlier analysis treating VIQ as a covariate.
Discussion
In this study we examined the issue of heterogeneity in mentalizing ability in adults with
ASC. We discovered distinct, replicable, and robust data-driven ASC subgroups who differ in
performance on the RMET. The first subgroup, whom we call the ‘Impaired’ subgroup, consists
of only a small subset of ASC adults (15 to 33%) and exhibits profound difficulties within the
domain of mentalizing with heavily reduced RMET scores compared to typically-developing
controls. In contrast, the second subgroup, whom we call the ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup, consists of
a majority of ASC adults (67 to 85%) and shows little to no consistent deficit in mentalizing as
measured by the RMET. Parsing ASC mentalizing heterogeneity into these subgroups is
important for several reasons. First, rather than a majority of individuals showing difficulty, only
a minority of adults with ASC still show substantial difficulty in mentalizing in adulthood. In the
context of standard case-control studies that look for on-average group differences, it is clear that
this small subset is primarily driving the effects observed in adults on the RMET 37. Given this
insight, it seems like an obvious necessity for future work to take a similar stratification approach
as we have, in order to break through with more clear and precise interpretations about who
possesses mentalizing deficits in adults with ASC via the RMET.
Of equal importance is the idea that a majority of adults with ASC show little to no
difficulty on this advanced mentalizing task. This could potentially mean that mentalizing ability
for a majority of ASC adults has developed into an effective ability that can be explicitly
deployed in specific circumstances. However, although we are describing this subgroup
comprising a majority of ASC adults as having little to no difficulty, an important caveat is that
when ASC individuals are strictly included after gold-standard instrument diagnostic validation
(i.e. replication dataset) as opposed to simply self-reporting ASC diagnosis (i.e. discovery
dataset), there was a notable decrease in RMET scores in this group (i.e. Cohen’s d = 0.73). This
could mean that a dataset with unverified self-diagnoses could underestimate the true subtle
difficulty this subgroup might have in mentalizing ability. In other words the effect size estimate
which may be more indicative of the true effect size might be that of the replication set simply

13

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

because diagnoses were all verified with gold-standard instruments. It is also possible that this
result reflects a subtle difficulty in aspects of mentalizing in this subgroup, but that the RMET
may not be as sensitive to picking up such difficulty. It may be that more sensitive tests looking
at understanding in real-world naturalistic social interactions, or which tap an individual’s ability
to automatically or implicitly mentalize, or which employ utilization of mentalizing to make
moral judgments, could all pull apart subtle yet persisting deficits in mentalizing 6, 19, 27, 28, 52-55. It
will be useful for future work to specifically examine this ‘Unimpaired’ group to test whether
more sensitive tests could reveal more subtle (or other aspects of) deficits or whether this group
could indeed be characterized as completely unimpaired in mentalizing ability. Nevertheless, our
findings of discrete, replicable, and robust ASC subgroups with differing mentalizing ability in
adulthood represents an important stride forward in terms of the precision of our understanding
of mentalizing difficulties in adulthood in individuals with ASC. This work is highly compatible
with the goals of ‘precision medicine’ or ‘stratified psychiatry’ and is what is needed to move
forward with research that has clinical impact for patients and which can also further
translational research progress focused on honing in on treatment-relevant mechanisms 29, 30.
In addition to the clinical impact of such insights about mentalizing heterogeneity, the
current study could have potentially large impact on basic areas of research on ASC. For
example, inconsistency within the functional and structural neuroimaging literature on ASC
(e.g., 16, 23, 56, 57) could be mitigated by a better understanding of mentalizing heterogeneity nested
within relatively small ASC samples typically utilized in such work. This point is exemplified by
recent work by Byrge and colleagues, whereby it is suggested that some group-level differences
in case-control designs could be driven by the effects nested within a small subgroup of patients
28
. A better a priori understanding of the heterogeneity present within the ASC population could
be of large impact for study design and could also implicate different underlying mechanisms
that explain such heterogeneity (e.g., 31, 58-60).
These subgroup distinctions are also particularly important to make because of how they
apply specifically to the RMET. The RMET is a long-standing standardized instrument that is
widely used within the autism literature and within social neuroscience in general. The NIMH
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) lists the RMET as one of several important tests for
characterizing variation in social processes, particularly under the category of Perception and
Understanding of Others (http://1.usa.gov/1Qs6MdI). With regards to treatment research, the
RMET is widely used as treatment outcome measure, particularly for drug manipulations (i.e.
oxytocin) or behavioral interventions targeting social skills and social cognition (e.g., 32-35). All
of this prior work utilizes an analytic strategy of computing RMET summary scores across all
items and then onto potentially sub-optimal omnibus case-control comparisons which mask the
presence of nested subgroups within ASC. The current work should signal a change in this
practice for how the RMET is utilized in important clinical settings (e.g., evaluating treatment
outcome). Rather than using summary scores in an omnibus ASC group, a more fruitful approach

14

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

would be to use the RMET to distinguish ‘Impaired’ vs ‘Unimpaired’ subgroups and to then
specifically evaluate whether such ASC subgroups respond differently to treatment. In other
words, the added knowledge we provide here is that these subgroups could signal a meaningful
distinction that helps the design of intervention studies and the interpretation of treatment
findings. Given the current state of largely mixed results for most interventions for ASC 36, it
may become clearer after subgrouping that some existing treatments do systematically work for
particular subgroups but not others.
The approach we have taken to subgroup the autism spectrum is also worth highlighting
in terms of its novelty and advantages. Rather than utilizing the RMET in a standard approach by
summarizing all items into one total score, we have instead retained the full data set of
information encoded across the 36 items as input into unsupervised hierarchical clustering
algorithms that came to data-driven conclusions about the presence of 2 distinct ASC subgroups.
This unsupervised approach avoids using experimenter-derived cutoffs and instead is completely
utilizing data-driven distinctions that are robust enough to emerge in a replicable fashion across
independent datasets. Data-driven subgrouping is by no means specific to the RMET. For
example, recent work has applied similar logic to clustering the phenotype based on goldstandard diagnostic instruments 61 and for clustering 26 different mouse models of genetic
mechanisms related to ASC 58. Clustering also forms the bedrock of systems biology genomic
approaches such as gene co-expression network analysis 62, 63, which is a highly utilized
approach in autism genetics research 64-68. Subgrouping approaches like clustering are
generalizable to any measure, and could be used in a whole range of new applications focused on
data-driven stratification in ASC.
A further advantage to our approach of finding data-driven distinctions is that such
distinctions are generalizable across datasets. As we have shown with the classification analyses,
the stratifications made in one dataset generalize to highly accurate predictions of the same datadriven subgroups in independent data. In future work, such information about replicable
subgroups could be turned into valuable assessment or research tools that could aid in study
design and participant/patient screening. For instance, randomized control trials may screen
patients along such distinctions or may use the RMET as an outcome measure and use such
distinctions to analyze individualized treatment response patterns. Such stratifications could also
be useful in clinical assessments and facilitates individualized treatment planning.
In addition to highlighting the promise of such stratifications for autism research, there
are also caveats that we have assessed in further follow-up analyses. We have found that ASC
subgroups are not systematically differentiated as a function of sex/gender, age, autistic traits,
trait empathy or symptom severity measured by ADI-R and ADOS. While most of these
measures showed consistency across Discovery and Replication datasets in the lack of subgroup
differentiation, the exceptions were the AQ and EQ. For both AQ and EQ, we found that

15

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

although the Discovery dataset showed a difference of higher autistic traits and lower empathy in
the ASC Impaired versus Unimpaired subgroup, this effect was not observed in the Replication
dataset. This lack of consistency may indicate differences in sampling and diagnostic verification
across the datasets may be relevant. In addition, the much larger Discovery dataset (but not the
Replication dataset) shows notably long-tailed distributions for the Unimpaired subgroup on both
measures (Supplementary Figures 5A and 6A). This characteristic of the ASC Unimpaired
distributions may be one that may become more apparent in cohorts of much larger sizes and
could potentially explain why such differences appear for the Discovery but not Replication
dataset. At the cognitive level of explanation, it could be that the Unimpaired subgroup is
potentially still a heterogeneous mixture of individuals that cannot be easily parsed via the
RMET, as some individuals in this group may be truly unimpaired, while others may mask
deficits via other compensatory mechanisms that allow them to ‘hack’ out explicit solutions in
ways that TD individuals may not utilize. Future work employing more sensitive mentalizing
measures as well as other sensitive measures of everyday social functioning may be able to pick
apart these aspects of heterogeneity in the Unimpaired subgroup. And finally, a third alternative
explanation could be related to individual differences in self-referential cognitive ability such as
self-insight that both self-report AQ and EQ measures rest upon. Theoretically, there are very
important links between self-referential cognition and the domain of mentalizing 7-14, and this
may ultimately influence the accuracy of self-report for some ASC patients 69, but may also be
integrally related to the difficulties some patients have in the domain of mentalizing.
Perhaps hinting at some level of non-social cognitive ability that differentiates these
RMET-defined ASC subgroups, we discovered that the Impaired subgroup is lower in VIQ than
both ASC Unimpaired and TD groups. This VIQ effect on the RMET has been noted before 70
and may be easily understood given that the RMET may tax vocabulary for some individuals and
on some items. Despite this effect of VIQ, we found that the reduction in mentalizing ability in
the ASC Impaired subgroup could not be accounted for simply by this VIQ effect. When
controlling for the effect of VIQ as well as a range of other factors (e.g., sex/gender, age, center)
we still found evidence for robust deficits in mentalizing within the ASC Impaired subgroup.
This evidence suggests that while some variability in RMET performance is linked to variability
in VIQ, these subgroup distinctions are not fully explained by VIQ variation. Rather, the ASC
Impaired subgroup consists of individuals with particular difficulty in mentalizing in adulthood.
In conclusion, the discoveries in this study allow for a more precise understanding of
mentalizing difficulties in adults with ASC. Our insights have the potential to further
personalized medicine aims in ways that accelerate progress towards clinical impact for patients.
By understanding how the autism spectrum can be stratified in clinically meaningful ways,
translational opportunities also may open up that could test whether such distinctions are rooted
in distinct underlying mechanisms.

16

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the UK Medical Research Council (MRC), Wellcome Trust and the
Autism Research Trust. This study was conducted in association with the National Institute for
Health Research Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care East of
England at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust (NIHR CLHARC EoE)
and the European Autism Interventions—A Multicentre Study for Developing New Medications
(EU-AIMS) consortium; EU-AIMS receives support from the Innovative Medicines Initiative
Joint Undertaking under grant agreement number 115300, resources of which are composed of
financial contribution from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–
2013), EFPIA companies, and Autism Speaks. M-CL and AR were supported by the William
Binks Autism Neuroscience Fellowship at the University of Cambridge. M-CL is supported by
the O’Brien Scholars Program within the Child and Youth Mental Health Collaborative at the
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto.

17

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.

Baron-Cohen S, Leslie AM, Frith U. Does the autistic child have a "theory of mind"?
Cognition 1985; 21(1): 37-46.

2.

Baron-Cohen S. Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA, 1995.

3.

Frith U. Mind blindness and the brain in autism. Neuron 2001; 32(6): 969-979.

4.

Frith U, Happe F, Siddons F. Autism and theory of mind in everyday life. Social
Development 1994; 3(2): 108-124.

5.

Happe FG. The role of age and verbal ability in the theory of mind task performance of
subjects with autism. Child Dev 1995; 66(3): 843-855.

6.

Senju A, Southgate V, White S, Frith U. Mindblind eyes: an absence of spontaneous
theory of mind in Asperger syndrome. Science (New York, NY 2009; 325(5942): 883-885.

7.

Lombardo MV, Barnes JL, Wheelwright SJ, Baron-Cohen S. Self-referential cognition
and empathy in autism. PLoS One 2007; 2(9): e883.

8.

Lombardo MV, Baron-Cohen S. Unraveling the paradox of the autistic self. WIREs
Cognitive Science 2010; 1: 393-403.

9.

Lombardo MV, Baron-Cohen S. The role of the self in mindblindness in autism.
Consciousness and cognition 2011; 20(1): 130-140.

10.

Williams D. Theory of own mind in autism: Evidence of a specific deficit in selfawareness? Autism : the international journal of research and practice 2010; 14(5): 474494.

11.

Williams DM, Happe F. What did I say? Versus what did I think? Attributing false
beliefs to self amongst children with and without autism. J Autism Dev Disord 2009;
39(6): 865-873.

12.

Frith U. Autism: Explaining the enigma., 2nd edn. Blackwell: Malden, MA, 2003.

13.

Frith U, Happe F. Theory of mind and self-consciousness: What it is like to be autistic.
Mind and Language 1999; 14: 1-22.

14.

Hurlburt RT, Happe F, Frith U. Sampling the form of inner experience in three adults
with Asperger syndrome. Psychological medicine 1994; 24(2): 385-395.

15.

Castelli F, Frith C, Happe F, Frith U. Autism, Asperger syndrome and brain mechanisms
for the attribution of mental states to animated shapes. Brain 2002; 125(Pt 8): 1839-1849.
18

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

16.

Lombardo MV, Chakrabarti B, Bullmore ET, Consortium MA, Baron-Cohen S.
Specialization of right temporo-parietal junction for mentalizing and its association with
social impairments in autism. Neuroimage 2011; 56: 1832-1838.

17.

White SJ, Frith U, Rellecke J, Al-Noor Z, Gilbert SJ. Autistic adolescents show atypical
activation of the brain's mentalizing system even without a prior history of mentalizing
problems. Neuropsychologia 2014; 56: 17-25.

18.

Baron-Cohen S, Ring HA, Wheelwright S, Bullmore ET, Brammer MJ, Simmons A, et
al. Social intelligence in the normal and autistic brain: An fMRI study. The European
journal of neuroscience 1999; 11: 1891-1898.

19.

Pantelis PC, Byrge L, Tyszka JM, Adolphs R, Kennedy DP. A specific hypoactivation of
right temporo-parietal junction/posterior superior temporal sulcus in response to socially
awkward situations in autism. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2015; 10(10): 1348-1356.

20.

Redcay E, Dodell-Feder D, Mavros PL, Kleiner M, Pearrow MJ, Triantafyllou C, et al.
Atypical brain activation patterns during a face-to-face joint attention game in adults with
autism spectrum disorder. Hum Brain Mapp 2013; 34(10): 2511-2523.

21.

Kana RK, Keller TA, Cherkassky VL, Minshew NJ, Just MA. Atypical frontal-posterior
synchronization of Theory of Mind regions in autism during mental state attribution. Soc
Neurosci 2009; 4(2): 135-152.

22.

Kana RK, Libero LE, Hu CP, Deshpande HD, Colburn JS. Functional brain networks and
white matter underlying theory-of-mind in autism. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2014; 9(1):
98-105.

23.

Dufour N, Redcay E, Young L, Mavros PL, Moran JM, Triantafyllou C, et al. Similar
brain activation during false belief tasks in a large sample of adults with and without
autism. PLoS One 2013; 8(9): e75468.

24.

Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Baron-Cohen S. Autism. Lancet 2014; 383: 896-910.

25.

Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Chakrabarti B, Baron-Cohen S. Subgrouping the autism
"spectrum": reflections on DSM-5. PLoS biology 2013; 11(4): e1001544.

26.

Brock J. Commentary: Complementary approaches to the developmental cognitive
neuroscience of autism--reflections on Pelphrey et al. (2011). J Child Psychol Psychiatry
2011; 52(6): 645-646.

27.

Moran JM, Young LL, Saxe R, Lee SM, O'Young D, Mavros PL, et al. Impaired theory
of mind for moral judgment in high-functioning autism. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2011; 108(7): 2688-2692.

19

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

28.

Byrge L, Dubois J, Tyszka JM, Adolphs R, Kennedy DP. Idiosyncratic brain activation
patterns are associated with poor social comprehension in autism. J Neurosci 2015;
35(14): 5837-5850.

29.

Kapur S, Phillips AG, Insel TR. Why has it taken so long for biological psychiatry to
develop clinical tests and what to do about it? Molecular psychiatry 2012; 17(12): 11741179.

30.

Insel TR. The NIMH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) Project: precision medicine for
psychiatry. The American journal of psychiatry 2014; 171(4): 395-397.

31.

Lombardo MV, Pierce K, Eyler LT, Carter Barnes C, Ahrens-Barbeau C, Solso S, et al.
Different functional neural substrates for good and poor language outcome in autism.
Neuron 2015; 86(2): 567-577.

32.

Soorya LV, Siper PM, Beck T, Soffes S, Halpern D, Gorenstein M, et al. Randomized
comparative trial of a social cognitive skills group for children with autism spectrum
disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2015;
54(3): 208-216 e201.

33.

Anagnostou E, Soorya L, Chaplin W, Bartz J, Halpern D, Wasserman S, et al. Intranasal
oxytocin versus placebo in the treatment of adults with autism spectrum disorders: a
randomized controlled trial. Mol Autism 2012; 3(1): 16.

34.

Einfeld SL, Smith E, McGregor IS, Steinbeck K, Taffe J, Rice LJ, et al. A double-blind
randomized controlled trial of oxytocin nasal spray in Prader Willi syndrome. Am J Med
Genet A 2014; 164A(9): 2232-2239.

35.

Cacciotti-Saija C, Langdon R, Ward PB, Hickie IB, Scott EM, Naismith SL, et al. A
double-blind randomized controlled trial of oxytocin nasal spray and social cognition
training for young people with early psychosis. Schizophr Bull 2015; 41(2): 483-493.

36.

Fletcher-Watson S, McConnell F, Manola E, McConachie H. Interventions based on the
Theory of Mind cognitive model for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The Cochrane
database of systematic reviews 2014; 3: CD008785.

37.

Baron-Cohen S, Bowen DC, Holt RJ, Allison C, Auyeung B, Lombardo MV, et al. The
"Reading the Mind in the Eyes" Test: Complete Absence of Typical Sex Difference in
~400 Men and Women with Autism. PLoS One 2015; 10(8): e0136521.

38.

Daniels AM, Rosenberg RE, Anderson C, Law JK, Marvin AR, Law PA. Verification of
parent-report of child autism spectrum disorder diagnosis to a web-based autism registry.
J Autism Dev Disord 2012; 42(2): 257-265.

20

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

39.

Wilson CE, Happe F, Wheelwright SJ, Ecker C, Lombardo MV, Johnston P, et al. The
neuropsychology of male adults with high-functioning autism or asperger syndrome.
Autism Res 2014; 7(5): 568-581.

40.

Lord C, Rutter M, Le Couteur A. Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised: a revised version
of a diagnostic interview for caregivers of individuals with possible pervasive
developmental disorders. J Autism Dev Disord 1994; 24(5): 659-685.

41.

Lord C, Risi S, Lambrecht L, Cook EH, Jr., Leventhal BL, DiLavore PC, et al. The
autism diagnostic observation schedule-generic: a standard measure of social and
communication deficits associated with the spectrum of autism. J Autism Dev Disord
2000; 30(3): 205-223.

42.

Wechsler D. Wechsler abbreviated scale of intelligence. The Psychological Corporation:
San Antonio, TX, 1999.

43.

Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S, Hill J, Raste Y, Plumb I. The "Reading the Mind in the
Eyes" Test revised version: a study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger
syndrome or high-functioning autism. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2001; 42(2): 241-251.

44.

Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S, Skinner R, Martin J, Clubley E. The autism-spectrum
quotient (AQ): evidence from Asperger syndrome/high-functioning autism, males and
females, scientists and mathematicians. J Autism Dev Disord 2001; 31(1): 5-17.

45.

Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S. The empathy quotient: an investigation of adults with
Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex differences. J Autism Dev
Disord 2004; 34(2): 163-175.

46.

Duda RO, Hart PE. Pattern classification and scene analysis, vol. 3. Wiley: New York,
1973.

47.

Charrad M, Ghazzali N, Boiteau V, Niknafs A. NbClust: an R package for determining
the relevant number of clusters in a data set. Journal of Statistical Software 2014; 61: 136.

48.

Rousseeuw P. Silhouettes: A Graphical Aid to the Interpretation and Validation of
Cluster Analysis. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 1987; 20: 53–65.

49.

Verhagen J, Wagenmakers EJ. Bayesian tests to quantify the result of a replication
attempt. J Exp Psychol Gen 2014; 143(4): 1457-1475.

50.

Kriegeskorte N, Simmons WK, Bellgowan PS, Baker CI. Circular analysis in systems
neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping. Nature neuroscience 2009; 12(5): 535-540.

51.

Vul E, Harris C, Winkielman P, Pashler H. Puzzlingly high correlations in fMRI studies
of emotion, personality and social cognition. Perspect Psychol Sci 2009; 4: 274-290.

21

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

52.

Dziobek I, Fleck S, Kalbe E, Rogers K, Hassenstab J, Brand M, et al. Introducing
MASC: a movie for the assessment of social cognition. J Autism Dev Disord 2006; 36(5):
623-636.

53.

Golan O, Baron-Cohen S, Hill JJ, Golan Y. The "reading the mind in films" task:
complex emotion recognition in adults with and without autism spectrum conditions. Soc
Neurosci 2006; 1(2): 111-123.

54.

Barnes JL, Lombardo MV, Wheelwright S, Baron-Cohen S. Moral dilemmas film task: A
study of spontaneous narratives by individuals with autism spectrum conditions. Autism
research : official journal of the International Society for Autism Research 2009; 2(3):
148-156.

55.

Auyeung B, Lombardo MV, Heinrichs M, Chakrabarti B, Sule A, Deakin JB, et al.
Oxytocin increases eye contact during a real-time, naturalistic social interaction in males
with and without autism. Transl Psychiatry 2015; 5: e507.

56.

Haar S, Berman S, Behrmann M, Dinstein I. Anatomical Abnormalities in Autism? Cereb
Cortex 2014.

57.

Lefebvre A, Beggiato A, Bourgeron T, Toro R. Neuroanatomical Diversity of Corpus
Callosum and Brain Volume in Autism: Meta-analysis, Analysis of the Autism Brain
Imaging Data Exchange Project, and Simulation. Biol Psychiatry 2015; 78(2): 126-134.

58.

Ellegood J, Anagnostou E, Babineau BA, Crawley JN, Lin L, Genestine M, et al.
Clustering autism: using neuroanatomical differences in 26 mouse models to gain insight
into the heterogeneity. Molecular psychiatry 2015; 20(1): 118-125.

59.

Bernier R, Golzio C, Xiong B, Stessman HA, Coe BP, Penn O, et al. Disruptive CHD8
mutations define a subtype of autism early in development. Cell 2014; 158(2): 263-276.

60.

Pickles A, Anderson DK, Lord C. Heterogeneity and plasticity in the development of
language: a 17-year follow-up of children referred early for possible autism. J Child
Psychol Psychiatry 2014; 55(12): 1354-1362.

61.

Hu VW, Steinberg ME. Novel clustering of items from the Autism Diagnostic InterviewRevised to define phenotypes within autism spectrum disorders. Autism Res 2009; 2(2):
67-77.

62.

Langfelder P, Horvath S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network
analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 2008; 9: 559.

63.

Parikshak NN, Gandal MJ, Geschwind DH. Systems biology and gene networks in
neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. Nat Rev Genet 2015; 16(8): 441458.

22

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

64.

Voineagu I, Wang X, Johnston P, Lowe JK, Tian Y, Horvath S, et al. Transcriptomic
analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent molecular pathology. Nature 2011;
474(7351): 380-384.

65.

Gupta S, Ellis SE, Ashar FN, Moes A, Bader JS, Zhan J, et al. Transcriptome analysis
reveals dysregulation of innate immune response genes and neuronal activity-dependent
genes in autism. Nat Commun 2014; 5: 5748.

66.

Parikshak NN, Luo R, Zhang A, Won H, Lowe JK, Chandran V, et al. Integrative
functional genomic analyses implicate specific molecular pathways and circuits in
autism. Cell 2013; 155(5): 1008-1021.

67.

Pramparo T, Pierce K, Lombardo MV, Carter Barnes C, Marinero S, Ahrens-Barbeau C,
et al. Prediction of autism by translation and immune/inflammation coexpressed genes in
toddlers from pediatric community practices. JAMA Psychiatry 2015; 72(4): 386-394.

68.

Pramparo T, Lombardo MV, Campbell K, Carter Barnes C, Marinero S, Solso S, et al.
Cell cycle networks link gene expression dysregulation, mutation, and brain
maldevelopment in autistic toddlers. Mol Syst Biol 2015; 11: 841.

69.

Griffin C, Lombardo MV, Auyeung B. Alexithymia in children with and without autism
spectrum disorders. Autism Res 2015.

70.

Peterson E, Miller SF. The Eyes Test as a Measure of Individual Differences: How much
of the Variance Reflects Verbal IQ? Front Psychol 2012; 3: 220.

23

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Text
Sex/Gender across ASC subgroups
The distribution of males and females across ASC subgroups was relatively equal,
indicating no systematic bias for either males or females being over-/under-represented in any of
the subgroups (Discovery: χ2 = 1.27, p = 0.25; Replication: χ2 = 0.46, p = 0.49; See
Supplementary Figure 2).
Verbal IQ differences across ASC subgroups
Examination of VIQ (available only in the replication dataset) revealed evidence for
slightly lower VIQ in the ‘Impaired’ subgroup compared to the ‘Unimpaired’ subgroup and the
TD group, as well as lower VIQ in the Unimpaired versus TD group (F(2,246) = 7.72, p = 5.59e4; ‘Impaired’ mean = 103.60, ‘Unimpaired’ mean = 111.36, TD mean = 113.13; ‘Impaired’ vs
‘Unimpaired’: t(121) = -2.84, p = 0.005, Cohen’s d = 0.54; ‘Impaired’ vs TD: t(164) = -5.71, p =
5.16e-8, Cohen’s d = 1.03; ‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(207) = -4.95, p = 1.51e-6, Cohen’s d = 0.70).
This effect for VIQ being lower in the ASC ‘Impaired’ subgroup is somewhat expected given
that some portion of variability in RMET performance is known to be linked with VIQ
variability 70. It is also noteworthy that while these effects appear to be consistent with ideas
regarding effects of VIQ on RMET performance, they are not strong enough to pass correction
for multiple comparisons for the full number of tests run across the entire study. Therefore, we
would interpret this result as of some importance, given its links to prior ideas about the effects
of VIQ on RMET performance, but it is unlikely that these effects are strong enough to
completely explain the presence of these subgroups or the massive reductions observed in RMET
total scores. Congruent with these ideas, when we covaried out variability in VIQ in our analyses
of RMET total scores, we still found robust evidence for decreased RMET scores in the ASC
Impaired group compared to the TD group, and this suggests that while a correlation between
VIQ and RMET performance is likely to be real, it does not explain the presence of ASC RMET
subgroups identified here. See Supplementary Figure 3.
Age across ASC subgroups
We found no consistent effect for any differences in age between ASC subgroups or TD
across both datasets (Discovery: F(2,691) = 4.49, p = 0.01; ‘Impaired’ mean = 39.68,
‘Unimpaired’ mean = 36.94, TD mean = 35.07; ‘Impaired’ vs ‘Unimpaired’: t(376) = 1.64, p =
0.10, Cohen’s d = 0.23; ‘Impaired’ vs TD: t(372) = 2.64, p = 0.008, Cohen’s d = 0.37;
‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(634) = 1.99, p = 0.04, Cohen’s d = 0.15; Replication: F(2,246) = 1.68, p
= 0.18; ‘Impaired’ mean = 28.14, ‘Unimpaired’ mean = 26.14, TD mean = 27.84; ‘Impaired’ vs

24

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

‘Unimpaired’: t(121) = 1.35, p = 0.17, Cohen’s d = 0.26; ‘Impaired’ vs TD: t(164) = 0.22, p =
0.82, Cohen’s d = 0.04; ‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(207) = -1.73, p = 0.08, Cohen’s d = 0.24). See
Supplementary Figure 4.
Autistic traits and trait empathy across ASC subgroups
With regard to autistic traits measured by the AQ, we found no evidence of a consistent
difference in autistic traits between ASC subgroups across both datasets, despite the fact that in
comparison to TD, there was the known large difference in autistic traits (Discovery: F(2,691) =
467.15, p = 4.58e-129; ‘Impaired’ mean = 39.48, ‘Unimpaired’ mean = 34.96, TD mean = 16.25;
‘Impaired’ vs ‘Unimpaired’: t(376) = 3.21, p = 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.45; ‘Impaired’ vs TD:
t(372) = 24.35, p = 5.12e-79, Cohen’s d = 3.47; ‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(634) = 28.19, p = 5.41e114, Cohen’s d = 2.23; Replication: F(2,220) = 145.56, p = 5.35e-41; ‘Impaired’ mean = 32.21,
‘Unimpaired’ mean = 30.89, TD mean = 13.88; ‘Impaired’ vs ‘Unimpaired’: t(107) = 0.70, p =
0.48, Cohen’s d = 0.14; ‘Impaired’ vs TD: t(145) = 13.33, p = 5.53e-27, Cohen’s d = 2.61;
‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(188) = 15.76, p = 3.14e-36, Cohen’s d = 2.33). See Supplementary
Figure 5.
Similarly, for trait empathy measured by the EQ, there were no consistent differences
between ASC subgroups across datasets despite there being a large difference when compared to
the TD group (Discovery: F(2,691) = 271.90, p = 7.78e-88; ‘Impaired’ mean = 15.79,
‘Unimpaired’ mean = 23.23, TD mean = 46.12; ‘Impaired’ vs ‘Unimpaired’: t(376) = -3.55, p =
4.23e-4, Cohen’s d = 0.50; ‘Impaired’ vs TD: t(372) = -17.18, p = 3.91e-49, Cohen’s d = 2.45;
‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(634) = -20.81, p = 9.75e-74, Cohen’s d = 1.65; Replication: F(2,219) =
100.58, p = 1.03e-31; ‘Impaired’ mean = 22.69, ‘Unimpaired’ mean = 24.01, TD mean = 46.72;
‘Impaired’ vs ‘Unimpaired’: t(107) = -0.53, p = 0.59, Cohen’s d = 0.11; ‘Impaired’ vs TD: t(144)
= -9.49, p = 6.54e-17, Cohen’s d = 1.87; ‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(187) = -12.87, p = 1.38e-27,
Cohen’s d = 1.90). See Supplementary Figure 6.
Depression and Anxiety across ASC subgroups
Regarding the severity of depressive symptoms as measured by the BDI within the AIMS
dataset, we found no evidence for differences between the ASC subgroups, despite both these
subgroups showing elevated scores compared to the TD group (F(2,214) = 21.12, p = 4.25e-9;
‘Impaired’ mean = 13.92, ‘Unimpaired’ mean = 12.43, TD mean = 5.80; ‘Impaired’ vs
‘Unimpaired’: t(119) = 0.78, p = 0.43, Cohen’s d = 0.15; ‘Impaired’ vs TD: t(132) = 6.27, p =
4.67e-9, Cohen’s d = 1.23; ‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(177) = 5.66, p = 5.79e-8, Cohen’s d = 0.88).
See Supplementary Figure 7A.

25

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Similarly for the severity of anxiety symptoms measured by the BAI, we also found no
evidence of ASC subgroup differentiation, despite both being elevated compared to TD
(F(2,243) = 32.23, p = 3.83e-13; ‘Impaired’ mean = 16.74, ‘Unimpaired’ mean = 12.74, TD
mean = 4.93; ‘Impaired’ vs ‘Unimpaired’: t(119) = 1.72, p = 0.08, Cohen’s d = 0.33; ‘Impaired’
vs TD: t(162) = 7.96, p = 2.78e-13, Cohen’s d = 1.45; ‘Unimpaired’ vs TD: t(205) = 6.62, p =
3.06e-10, Cohen’s d = 0.94). See Supplementary Figure 7B.
Autism Symptom Severity across ASC subgroups
Finally, with regards to early developmental autism symptom severity as measured by
algorithm scores on the ADI-R, we found no evidence of differentiation of ASC Impaired
compared to ASC Unimpaired subgroups on the social (t(97) = 1.04, p = 0.29, Cohen’s d = 0.22),
communication (t(97) = 0.51, p = 0.61, Cohen’s d = 0.10) or repetitive and restricted behavior
subscales (t(97) = -0.76, p = 0.44, Cohen’s d = 0.16). See Supplementary Figure 8.
However, for current symptom severity measured by ADOS algorithm scores, we found
that the ASD Impaired subgroup was slightly elevated on both the communication (t(118) =
2.0004, p = 0.04, Cohen’s d = 0.38), and social interaction subscales (t(97) = 2.34, p = 0.02,
Cohen’s d = 0.45). However, because these effects are somewhat weak, and would not pass
correction for multiple testing, we would err on the side of caution when interpreting it as a
potential true effect. See Supplementary Figure 9.

26

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figures

A

B

Discovery Dataset (CARD)

TD1

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

TD1

TD2

TD2

Supplementary Figure 1: This figure shows TD subgroups (red and blue) on clustergrams of
both the discovery (A) and replication (B) datasets.

A

B

Discovery Dataset (CARD)

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

Impaired Unimpaired

Impaired Unimpaired

Male

22
(25.93)

147
(143.06)

Male

26
(27.64)

59
(57.35)

Female

36
(32.06)

173
(176.93)

Female

14
(12.35)

24
(25.64)

χ2 = 1.27, p = 0.25

χ2 = 0.46, p = 0.49

Supplementary Figure 2: This figure shows contingency tables with counts of the number of
individuals in both datasets (A, Discovery CARD dataset; B, Replication AIMS dataset) that fall
into the different ASC subgroups and who are either male or female. The numbers within each
cell correspond to the actual count and the expected count within the parentheses.

27

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 3: This figure shows the
scatter-boxplot of verbal IQ (VIQ) measured within
the replication dataset (AIMS) across all groups.

ASC
Impaired

A

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

B

Discovery Dataset (CARD)

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

Supplementary Figure 4: This figure
shows the scatter-boxplots across both
datasets (A, Discovery CARD dataset;
B, Replication AIMS dataset) for age
across all groups.

ASC
Impaired

A

ASC
Unimpaired

ASC
Impaired

TD

B

Discovery Dataset (CARD)

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

Supplementary Figure 5: This figure
shows the scatter-boxplots across both
datasets (A, Discovery CARD dataset;
B, Replication AIMS dataset) for
autistic traits measured by the AQ
across all groups.
ASC
Impaired

A

ASC
Unimpaired

ASC
Impaired

TD

B

Discovery Dataset (CARD)

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

Replication Dataset (AIMS)

Supplementary Figure 6: This figure
shows the scatter-boxplots across both
datasets (A, Discovery CARD dataset;
B, Replication AIMS dataset) for trait
empathy measured by the EQ across
all groups.
ASC
Impaired

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

ASC
Impaired

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

28

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Dec. 15, 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/034454. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

B

Depression

Anxiety

Supplementary Figure 7: This figure
shows
the
scatter-boxplots
of
depression (A) or anxiety (B) symptom
scores measured by the BDI and BAI
respectively for all groups. This data
was measured only within the
replication dataset (AIMS).
ASC
Impaired

A

ASC
Unimpaired

ASC
Impaired

TD

ADOS Communication

B

ASC
Unimpaired

TD

ADOS Social Interaction

Supplementary Figure 8: This figure
shows the scatter-boxplots of ADOS
communication (A) and social
interaction (B) algorithm scores for
the ASC subgroups. This data was
measured only within the replication
dataset (AIMS).
ASC
Impaired

A

ASC
Unimpaired

ADI-R Communication

ASC
Impaired

ASC
Unimpaired

ASC
Impaired

B

ASC
Unimpaired

ADI-R Social Interaction

ASC
Impaired

ASC
Unimpaired

C

ADI-R RRB

ASC
Impaired

ASC
Unimpaired

Supplementary Figure 9: This figure shows the scatter-boxplots of ADI-R communication (A),
social interaction (B), or restricted/repetitive behavior (C) algorithm scores for the ASC
subgroups. This data was measured only within the replication dataset (AIMS).

29

