CONNECTIVITY IN PRACTICE: Syllabus
Michael Peter Milham, MD, PhD
Potental Applications
Recent years have witnessed a rapid transformation in the imaging community, marked by a shift in
emphasis from the characterization of regional properties (e.g., task-related activations) to that of
functional interactions among regions – termed functional connectivity. In particular, resting state
based functional connectivity (RSFC) approaches have taken a lead role in the imaging community,
due to their ability to map functional circuits in the brain with great detail and accuracy, and their
impressive test-retest reliability and reproducibility across labs. Most excitingly, the relative simplicity of
data acquisition and demonstrated ability to pool data across laboratories, have positioned RSFC
approaches as a vehicle for discovery science for human brain function.
A diverse array of potential applications exists for functional connectivity approaches, making them
relevant to the broader basic, clinical and translational neuroscientific communities. Whether it is the
study of human brain function and organization, or the impact of developmental, aging and/or
pathologic processes on the brain, RSFC approaches are rapidly providing new insights. The ability to
avoid practice, floor and ceiling effects make RSFC ideally suited for application in longitudinal designs,
whether observational or treatment-response. Additionally, initial endeavors demonstrating the ability to
carry out in vivo comparative functional anatomy studies across species (e.g., humans, primates,
rodents) have suggested transformative potential for the application RSFC approaches in translational
science.
Examples of each of these applications will be discussed in today’s presentation.
Challenges and Considerations
Despite the excitement of RSFC approaches, many considerations need to be taken into account to
avoid misinterpretation of results, as well as the potential for artifactual findings. In particular, the need
to consider potential cardiovascular physiological signals that can contribute to BOLD signal and
possibly confound relationships among regions. Corrections capable of removing such signals have
emerged, though require the collection of physiological measures that are not always easy to obtain.
Data-driven approaches for physiological correction are also emerging, though their utility requires
further validation. To date, the predominant approach is to not correct for these signals – while not
damning due to their relatively small contribution to the BOLD signal (< 5-15%), this approach is
suboptimal and likely to become more problematic as sample sizes increase.
Beyond respiratory and cardiac signals, another major source of potential confound is the global signal
(i.e., mean timeseries for the brain). Once believed to be purely artifactual, the global signal is
increasingly believed to contain a component that is a meaningful neurophysiological signal that “yolks”
the brain together. Investigators must decide whether to remove this signal or not, in the hopes of
revealing more intricate relationships among brain regions that may otherwise be overlooked. In this
regard, significant controversy has emerged regarding the best way to remove the global signal. Global
signal regression, the predominant approach, has come under increasing scrutiny due to the potential
to accentual negative relationships artifactually. Alternative corrections are emerging, though require
significant characterization and comparison.
One other noteworthy source of potential artifact in RSFC analyses is head motion. While the functional
MRI community is no stranger to the dangers of motion, researchers are increasingly aware of the
potential artifactual contributions of motion to the detection of differences among subjects – even at
“micro” levels. Similar to global correction and respiratory signal correction, there are approaches for
correction emerging, but the field remains without a clear choice.
I bring these various imaging-related source of artifacts to light, not to discourage the usage of RSFC
approaches, but rather to increase the attention of users so that analyses are conducted with full

Proc. Intl. Soc. Mag. Reson. Med. 20 (2012)

awareness of potential confounds and interrogated thoughtfully. Fortunately, many of these confounds
contribute relative small portions of the variance. Though with that said, their effects can potentially
sum, and at a minimum will become more prominent as sample sizes increase.
Equally important, though commonly overlooked in the imaging literature are subject-related confounds.
Marked variation exists with respect to recruitment strategies, selection criteria and phenotypic
characterizations employed across labs. Yet, imaging studies rarely draw attention to this reality. The
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) literature provides an example of an even greater
concern – namely, the lack of consideration of clinical heterogeneity. Despite the existence of 3 clinical
subtypes (combined type, predominantly inattentive type, predominantly hyperactive type), most ADHD
studies treat the disorder as a unitary phenomenon combining behavioral discrete subpopulations into
one for the sake of sample size concerns. Such practices may be justifiable if a common neural
substrate exists across all subtypes, but there is no clear justification for this to date. ADHD is not
unique in the challenge of having to manage clinical heterogeneity in imaging studies. Fortunately, as
large samples come into existence (e.g., the ADHD-200 Consortium Sample;
http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/retro/adhd200), so will the potential to turn this weakness into a
strength by examining and contrasting the substrates of clinical subtypes and determining the extent to
which phenotypic variability is associated with neural variability.
A final consideration as the field moves forward with efforts to use RSFC approaches for neuroscientific
and clinical discovery, is the need for large-scale samples. While most datasets remain with less than
one hundred participants, early estimates suggest that it will take hundreds of samples to achieve
stable results. Until we reach those numbers, we will find marked variation in findings from study to
study, as we look from one low-powered sample to the next. Data aggregation efforts (e.g., The 1000
Functional Connectomes Project [FCP] and the International Neuroimaging Data sharing Initiative
[INDI]) provide a potential solution to overcoming this challenge, though the obvious cautions are
needed when combining uncoordinated datasets across sites.
Recent work highlighting the need for considering these various cautions when attempting to discern
brain-behavior relationships will be discussed.
Suggested Readings
Beckmann, C.F., et al. (2005) Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent
component analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 360, 1001-1013
Bilder, R.M., et al. (2009) Phenomics: the systematic study of phenotypes on a genome-wide scale.
Neuroscience 164, 30-42
Biswal, B.B., et al. (2010) Toward discovery science of human brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107, 4734-4739
Buckner, R.L., et al. (2011) The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity. J Neurophysiol 106, 2322-2345
Chang, C., et al. (2009) Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function.
Neuroimage 44, 857-869
Craddock, R.C., et al. (2009) Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity. Magn
Reson Med 62, 1619-1628
Di Martino, A., et al. (2009) Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic
traits in neurotypical adults. Am J Psychiatry 166, 891-899
Dosenbach, N.U., et al. (2010) Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI. Science 329, 13581361
Fox, M.D., et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated
functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102, 9673-9678

Proc. Intl. Soc. Mag. Reson. Med. 20 (2012)

Fornito, A. and Bullmore, E.T. (2010) What can spontaneous fluctuations of the blood oxygenationlevel-dependent signal tell us about psychiatric disorders? Curr Opin Psychiatry 23, 239-249
Fransson, P., et al. (2011) The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting-state
fMRI. Cereb Cortex 21, 145-154
He, H. and Liu, T.T. (2011) A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI.
Neuroimage
Leopold, D.A. and Maier, A. (2011) Ongoing physiological processes in the cerebral cortex.
Neuroimage
Margulies, D.S., et al. (2010) Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies
for spontaneous brain activity. MAGMA 23, 289-307
Murphy, K., et al. (2009) The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: are anticorrelated networks introduced? Neuroimage 44, 893-905
Raichle, M.E. (2010) Two views of brain function. Trends Cogn Sci 14, 180-190
Smith, S.M., et al. (2011) Network modelling methods for FMRI. Neuroimage 54, 875-891
Van Dijk, K.R., et al. (2010) Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory,
properties, and optimization. J Neurophysiol 103, 297-321
Van Dijk, K.R., et al. (2011) The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI.
Neuroimage
Yeo, B.T., et al. (2011) The Organization of the Human Cerebral Cortex Estimated By Functional
Connectivity. J Neurophysiol
Zuo, X.N., et al. (2010) The oscillating brain: complex and reliable. Neuroimage 49, 1432-1445

Proc. Intl. Soc. Mag. Reson. Med. 20 (2012)

