Toward discovery science of human brain function

a
Department of Radiology, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103; bPhyllis Green and Randolph Cōwen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, New York
University Child Study Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016; cFMRIB Centre, Oxford University, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK; dHoward Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; eSchool of Psychology, University of Wales, Bangor, UK; fDanish Research Centre for Magnetic
Resonance, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, Hvidovre, Denmark; gMood and Anxiety Disorders Program, National Institute of Mental Health/
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD 20892; hBehavioral Neuroscience Department, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, OR 97239; iDepartment of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511; jDivision of Clinical
Research, Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY 10962; kBiophysics Research Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
WI 53226; lDepartment of Diagnostic Radiology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland; mDonders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Center for
Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; nBiophysics Research Institute, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226; oInstitute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan; pImaging Institute, The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
44195; qBrain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710; rDepartment of Cognitive Neurology, Max Planck Institute
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; sDepartment of Psychiatry and Department of Neurology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322; tCentre for Advanced Imaging, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; uDepartment of Psychology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; vLaboratory for Neurocognitive and Imaging Research, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, 21205; wDepartment of
Psychiatry, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239; xF.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Baltimore, MD 21205; yFunctional MRI Laboratory, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; zMcDonnell Center for Higher Brain Functions, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; aaDepartments of Neurology and Neuroradiology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, 81675 Munich, Germany; bbInstitute of Psychology and Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden University, Leiden,
The Netherlands; ccCenter for Brain Health and School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080; ddDepartment
of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; eeDepartment of Neurology, Charité Univesitaetsmedizin-Berlin, 10117
Berlin, Germany; ffSchool of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; ggDepartment of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213; hhDepartment of Psychiatry, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, D-81675 Munich, Germany; iiJiangsu Key Laboratory of
Molecular and Functional Imaging, Department of Radiology, Zhong-Da Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China; jjDepartment of Psychiatry,
Institute of Clinical Medicine and Department of Public Health Science, Institute of Health Science, University of Oulu, Oulu 90014, Finland; kkBerlin
NeuroImaging Center, 10099 Berlin, Germany; llDepartment of Psychiatry, Otto-von-Guericke University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg 39106, Germany;
mm
Laboratory for Higher Brain Function, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100864, China; nnDepartment of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA 02139; ooDepartment of Psychiatry,
University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A3H8, Canada; ppCenter for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria; and qqState Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China

Edited* by Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, and approved January 20, 2010 (received for review October 14, 2009)

Although it is being successfully implemented for exploration of
the genome, discovery science has eluded the functional neuroimaging community. The core challenge remains the development
of common paradigms for interrogating the myriad functional
systems in the brain without the constraints of a priori hypotheses. Resting-state functional MRI (R-fMRI) constitutes a candidate
approach capable of addressing this challenge. Imaging the brain
during rest reveals large-amplitude spontaneous low-frequency
(<0.1 Hz) ﬂuctuations in the fMRI signal that are temporally correlated across functionally related areas. Referred to as functional
connectivity, these correlations yield detailed maps of complex
neural systems, collectively constituting an individual’s “functional
connectome.” Reproducibility across datasets and individuals suggests the functional connectome has a common architecture, yet
each individual’s functional connectome exhibits unique features,
with stable, meaningful interindividual differences in connectivity
patterns and strengths. Comprehensive mapping of the functional
connectome, and its subsequent exploitation to discern genetic
inﬂuences and brain–behavior relationships, will require multicenter collaborative datasets. Here we initiate this endeavor by gathering R-fMRI data from 1,414 volunteers collected independently
at 35 international centers. We demonstrate a universal architecture of positive and negative functional connections, as well as
consistent loci of inter-individual variability. Age and sex emerged
as signiﬁcant determinants. These results demonstrate that independent R-fMRI datasets can be aggregated and shared. Highthroughput R-fMRI can provide quantitative phenotypes for
molecular genetic studies and biomarkers of developmental and
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0911855107

pathological processes in the brain. To initiate discovery science of
brain function, the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project dataset is
freely accessible at www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/.
database

| neuroimaging | open access | reproducibility | resting state

M

uch like the challenge of decoding the human genome, the
complexities of mapping human brain function pose a
challenge to the functional neuroimaging community. As demAuthor contributions: B.B.B., R.L.B., J.S.H., R.K., A.V., Y.Z., F.X.C., and M.P.M. designed
research; B.B.B., M.M., XN.Z., S.G., C.K., S.M.S., C.F.B., J.S.A., R.L.B., S.C., A.-M.D., M.E.,
D.F., M.H., M.J.H., J.S.H., V.J.K., R.K., SJ.L., CP.L., M.J.L., C.E.M., D.M., K.H.M., D.S.M., H.S.
M., K.M., C.S.M., S.M., B.J.N., J.J.P., S.J.P., S.E.P., V.R., S.A.R., B.R., B.L.S., S.S., R.D.S., G.S., C.S.,
GJ.T., J.M.V., A.V., M.W., L.W., XC.W., S.W.-G., P.W., C.W., Y.Z., HY.Z., F.X.C., and M.P.M.
performed research; S.M.S., C.F.B., R.L.B., S.C., A.-M.D., M.E., D.F., M.H., M.J.H., J.S.H., V.J.K.,
R.K., SJ.L., CP.L., M.J.L., C.E.M., D.M., K.H.M., D.S.M., H.S.M., K.M., C.S.M., S.M., B.J.N., J.J.P.,
S.J.P., S.E.P., V.R., S.A.R., B.R., B.L.S., S.S., R.D.S., G.S., C.S., GJ.T., J.M.V., A.V., M.W., L.W.,
XC.W., S.W.-G., P.W., C.W., Y.Z., HY.Z., B.B.B., F.X.C., and M.P.M. contributed new reagents/
analytic tools; B.B.B., M.M., XN.Z., S.G., C.K., F.X.C., and M.P.M. analyzed data; and B.B.B.,
M.M., XN.Z., C.K., J.S.A., F.X.C., and M.P.M. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
*This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: All data used in this work were released on December 11, 2009 via www.
nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: michael.milham@nyumc.org.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0911855107/DCSupplemental.

PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6

NEUROSCIENCE

Bharat B. Biswala, Maarten Mennesb, Xi-Nian Zuob, Suril Gohela, Clare Kellyb, Steve M. Smithc, Christian F. Beckmannc,
Jonathan S. Adelsteinb, Randy L. Bucknerd, Stan Colcombee, Anne-Marie Dogonowskif, Monique Ernstg, Damien Fairh,
Michelle Hampsoni, Matthew J. Hoptmanj, James S. Hydek, Vesa J. Kiviniemil, Rolf Kötterm, Shi-Jiang Lin, Ching-Po Lino,
Mark J. Lowep, Clare Mackayc, David J. Maddenq, Kristoffer H. Madsenf, Daniel S. Marguliesr, Helen S. Maybergs,
Katie McMahont, Christopher S. Monku, Stewart H. Mostofskyv, Bonnie J. Nagelw, James J. Pekarx, Scott J. Peltiery,
Steven E. Petersenz, Valentin Riedlaa, Serge A. R. B. Romboutsbb, Bart Rypmacc, Bradley L. Schlaggardd, Sein Schmidtee,
Rachael D. Seidlerff,u, Greg J. Sieglegg, Christian Sorghh, Gao-Jun Tengii, Juha Veijolajj, Arno Villringeree,kk,
Martin Walterll, Lihong Wangq, Xu-Chu Wengmm, Susan Whitﬁeld-Gabrielinn, Peter Williamsonoo,
Christian Windischbergerpp, Yu-Feng Zangqq, Hong-Ying Zhangii, F. Xavier Castellanosb,j, and Michael P. Milhamb,1

onstrated by the 1000 Genomes Project (1), the accumulation
and sharing of large-scale datasets for data mining is necessary
for the ﬁrst phase of discovery science.
Although the neuroimaging community has traditionally focused
on hypothesis-driven task-based approaches, resting-state functional MRI (R-fMRI) has recently emerged as a powerful tool for
discovery science. Imaging the brain during rest reveals largeamplitude spontaneous low-frequency (<0.1 Hz) ﬂuctuations in the
fMRI signal that are temporally correlated across functionally
related areas (2–5). A single R-fMRI scan (as brief as 5 min) can be
used to interrogate a multitude of functional circuits simultaneously, without the requirement of selecting a priori hypotheses
(6). Building on the term “connectome,” coined to describe the
comprehensive map of structural connections in the human brain
(7), we use “functional connectome” to describe the collective set of
functional connections in the human brain.
Buttressed by moderate to high test–retest reliability (8–10) and
replicability (11, 12), as well as widespread access, R-fMRI has
overcome initial skepticism (13) regarding the validity of examining
such an apparently unconstrained state (5, 8, 14). Recent R-fMRI
studies have identiﬁed putative biomarkers of neuropsychiatric
illness (12, 15–18), provided insight into the development of functional networks in the maturing and aging brain (19–22), demonstrated a shared intrinsic functional architecture (23) between

humans and nonhuman primates (24, 25), and delineated the
effects of sleep (26), anesthesia (27), and pharmacologic agents on
R-fMRI measures (28, 29). Given the many sources of variability
inherent in fMRI, the remaining challenge is to demonstrate the
feasibility and utility of adopting a high-throughput model for RfMRI, commensurate with the scale used by human genetics studies
to have the power to detect both single gene and combinatorial
genetic and environmental effects on complex phenotypes.
Accordingly, the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project was
formed to aggregate existing R-fMRI data from collaborating centers throughout the world and to provide an initial demonstration of
the ability to pool functional data across centers. As of December
11, 2009, the repository includes data from 1,414 healthy adult
participants contributed by 35 laboratories (Table S1). The intent is
to expand this open resource as additional data are made available.
Here we provide an initial demonstration of the feasibility of
pooling R-fMRI datasets across centers. Speciﬁcally, we (i)
establish the presence of a universal functional architecture in
the brain, consistently detectable across centers; (ii) investigate
the inﬂuence of center on R-fMRI measures; (iii) explore the
potential impact of demographic variables (e.g., age, sex) on RfMRI measures; and (iv) demonstrate the use of an intersubject
variance–based method for identifying putative boundaries
between functional networks.

Fig. 1. Independent center-, age-, and sex-related variations detected in R-fMRI measures of functional connectivity and amplitude ﬂuctuation. The ﬁrst row
depicts group-level maps for representative seed-based (column 1) and ICA-based (column 3) functional connectivity analyses (SI Results), as well as fALFF
(column 2). Group-level maps were derived from one-way ANOVA across 1,093 participants from 24 centers (factor: center; covariates: age and sex). All grouplevel maps depicted were corrected for multiple comparisons at the cluster level using Gaussian random-ﬁeld theory (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05, corrected). For each
measure, the second row shows robust between-center concordances (Kendall’s W), with the voxelwise coefﬁcients of variation above the diagonal and the
voxelwise means below the diagonal. Kendall’s W concordance between any two centers was calculated across all voxels in the brain mask for the mean (or
coefﬁcient of variation) connectivity map across all participants included in each center. Rows 3, 4, and 5 depict voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center,
age, and sex, respectively, as detected by one-way ANOVA. “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity (or amplitude, i.e., fALFF) in males; similarly,
“female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity (or amplitude) in females. “Older” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or amplitude) with
increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or amplitude) with decreasing age. “Pos” refers to positive functional
connectivity, and “neg” refers to negative functional connectivity. The PCC seed region is indicated by a white dot. (Top Left) Surface map legend: LL, left
lateral; RL, right lateral; LM, left medial; RM, right medial. All surface maps are rendered on the PALS-B12 atlas in CARET (http://brainvis.wustl.edu).

2 of 6 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0911855107

Biswal et al.

literature (35). Sexual dimorphism in human genomic expression
(36) is known to affect numerous physiological variables that can
inﬂuence the fMRI signal (37, 38). For example, males and
females differ in terms of hemoglobin concentrations and hematocrit (39). However, global variables such as these do not explain
the regionally speciﬁc sex-related phenomenon noted in the
present work. Hormonal effects (e.g., estrogen), operating both
during brain development (40) and acutely (41), are known to
have regional speciﬁcity (42), making them potential contributors
to the differences observed. Given the discovery nature of the
present work and the lack of prior coordination among centers,
the speciﬁc sex differences that we observed should be interpreted
with caution until replicated in an independent sample.
Along with examining patterns of functional connectivity, we
measured the amplitude of low-frequency ﬂuctuations at each
voxel using two common periodogram-based measures: amplitude of low frequency ﬂuctuation (ALFF; total power <0.1 Hz) (2,
17, 43) and fractional ALFF (fALFF; total power <0.1 Hz/total
power in the measured spectrum) (44). Concordant with previous
work, the dominance of low-frequency ﬂuctuations was consistently noted within gray matter regions, but not white matter
(44). As with our analyses of functional connectivity, despite clear
evidence of center-related effects, we were again able to demonstrate age- and sex-related differences in the magnitude of lowfrequency ﬂuctuations in various regions, particularly medial wall
structures (Fig. 2 and Fig. S7).
Beyond data pooling for statistical analyses, we demonstrate
the potential to use high-throughput datasets to develop normative maps of functional systems in the brain, which is a prerequisite for clinical applications. Speciﬁcally, we exploit a key
property of functional connectivity maps, the presence of welldifferentiated borders between functionally distinct regions (45).
The voxelwise measures of coefﬁcients of variation for each type
of functional connectivity map delineate putative functional
boundaries based on the presence of marked variability in func-

Fig. 2. Illustrative areas exhibiting age- and sex-related variation in R-fMRI properties. Signiﬁcant group-level variance in functional connectivity maps was
explained by age and sex (cluster-based Gaussian random-ﬁeld corrected: Z > 2.3; P < 0.05). For each of three methods (seed-based, fALFF, and ICA), variance
in connectivity strength explained by age (Left) and sex (Right) is illustrated both anatomically and graphically. Age-related differences are represented as
scatterplots. Sex-related differences are represented as histograms depicting the distributions of resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) values for males
and females separately. Vertical lines indicate peak values. Corresponding topographical brain areas are indicated with dots. “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly
greater connectivity (or amplitude, i.e., fALFF) in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity (or amplitude) in females. “Older”
refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or amplitude) with increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or
amplitude) with decreasing age.

Biswal et al.

PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 6

NEUROSCIENCE

Results
We applied three distinct analytic methods commonly used in the
R-fMRI literature: seed-based functional connectivity, independent component analysis (ICA), and frequency-domain
analyses. Across the three approaches, we found evidence of (i) a
universal intrinsic functional architecture in the human brain, (ii)
center-related variation in R-fMRI measures, and (iii) consistent
effects of age and sex on R-fMRI measures, detectable across
centers despite the presence of center-related variability (Fig. 1).
Speciﬁcally, seed-based correlational analyses revealed highly
consistent patterns of functional connectivity across centers for
both the “default mode” (30) and “task-positive” networks (31),
supporting a universal functional architecture (Fig. S1). Similarly,
a data-driven, temporal concatenation ICA approach, combined
with dual regression (32–34), revealed consistent patterns of
functional connectivity across centers for 20 spatially independent
functional networks (Fig. 1 and Figs. S2 and S3). In addition, for
each of the functional connectivity measures, within-center
coefﬁcient of variation maps showed a high degree of concordance across centers (Fig. S4). This suggests that common loci
of variation exist: centers demonstrated a high degree of agreement on which connections are characterized by relative variance
or invariance. Despite the high degree of concordance between
centers, there were appreciable center-related variations in the
strength of functional connectivity throughout the brain (8). The
effect of center was especially prominent in regions exhibiting
greater interregional connection strength, because these have the
least within-center variability (See SI Results and Fig. S5 for further discussion of center-related variability.) However, even when
taking this center-related variability into account, robustly reliable
effects of age and sex remained appreciable (Fig. 2 and Figs. S1
and S2). (See SI Results and Fig. S6 for an examination of the
impact of sample size on effects of age and sex.)
The detection of sex differences was particularly noteworthy,
because these differences are rarely appreciated in the R-fMRI

tional connectivity across participants. The variation observed at
these boundaries stands in contrast to the low degree of variability
observed in regions exhibiting consistently positive or negative
connectivity (Fig. 3). In addition, examination of the coefﬁcients
of variation for fALFF measures revealed sharp boundary zones
between white matter and gray matter. It also identiﬁed areas of
variability in the amplitude of spontaneous ﬂuctuations that
coincided with anatomic areas of notable sulcal variability (e.g.,
cingulate and frontal opercular regions).
Discussion
The present work represents a watershed event in functional
imaging: demonstration of the feasibility of sharing and pooling
functional data across multiple centers, alongside the establishment of an open-access data repository. We have demonstrated (i)
the presence of a universal functional architecture, with remarkable stability in the functional connectome and its loci of variation
across participants and centers; (ii) evidence of systematic sex
differences in R-fMRI measures, as well as age-related gradients
even in middle adulthood; and (iii) a method for highlighting the
complex array of putative functional boundaries between networks from which normative maps can be developed. Future work
should focus on using the functional connectome to catalog phenotypic diversity in brain–behavior relationships.
Functional connectivity is both related to and distinct from anatomic connectivity. Speciﬁcally, a recent study reported that a
structural core appears to play “a central role in integrating information across functionally segregated brain regions” (23). As such,
our ﬁnding of a universal functional architecture was not unexpected. But structure and function are not completely coupled, as
illustrated by the robust homotopic (i.e., contralateral) functional
connectivity for such regions as the primary visual cortex or the
amygdala, both of which lack direct callosal projections (24, 46).
Such ﬁndings imply that functional connectivity is subserved by
polysynaptic as well as monosynaptic anatomic circuits. In addition,
functional connectivity exhibits dynamic properties that are absent

in structural connectivity. For instance, functional connectivity is
modulated by cognitive (47) and emotional state (48), arousal, and
sleep (26), whereas structural connectivity is grossly unaffected by
such factors. In short, the presence of a demonstrable structural
connection does not necessitate that of a functional connection, nor
does the demonstration of a functional connection imply the presence of a direct structural connection.
Task-based fMRI and R-fMRI approaches have complementary roles in the study of human brain function. Task-based
approaches require sufﬁcient a priori knowledge to articulate
speciﬁc hypotheses, and they are invaluable in reﬁning such
hypotheses. But when the knowledge base is insufﬁcient, taskbased approaches may be compared to candidate gene studies,
which have had limited success when applied to complex genetic
disorders. In contrast, genome-wide association studies are
increasingly providing initial ﬁndings for complex traits (49) and
diseases that are subsequently validated through replication,
extension, and deep sequencing (50). Our demonstration that RfMRI data can be aggregated and pooled, and that variability
among individuals can be explained in terms of speciﬁc subject
variables (e.g., sex, age), suggests that this approach can provide
quantitative phenotypes to be integrated into molecular studies.
Our results must be considered in light of several limitations of
the present study. First, we used a convenience sample comprising previously collected data from an array of centers, without prior coordination of acquisition parameters or scanning
conditions. Although the robustness of our results attests to the
consistency of intrinsic brain activity, it still represents a potential
underestimate of the true across-center consistency. Our demographic data warrant caution, because centers were heterogeneous with respect to male:female ratio, mean age, and age
range. Our ﬁndings should motivate more systematic exploration
of these variables, because future high-throughput imaging
studies will need to take such factors into account.
Despite the promise of R-fMRI, some theoretical and pragmatic
issues need to be addressed. Examples include the determination of

Fig. 3. Variation across individuals reveals functional boundaries. Previous work has noted that functionally segregated regions are frequently characterized
by well-demarcated boundaries for an individual (45). As such, variability in boundary areas is detectable across participants. Here we detect functional
boundaries via examination of voxelwise coefﬁcients of variation (absolute value) for fALFF and selected seed-based [intraparietal sulcus (IPS), posterior
cingulate/precuneus (PCC)] and ICA-based (IC13) functional connectivity maps. For the purpose of visualization, coefﬁcients of variation were rank-ordered,
whereby the relative degree of variation across participants at a given voxel, rather than the actual value, was plotted to better contrast brain regions.
Ranking coefﬁcients of variation efﬁciently identiﬁed regions of greatest interindividual variability, thus delineating putative functional boundaries.

4 of 6 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0911855107

Biswal et al.

concatenation to generate group-level components and dual regression to
generate individual participant maps. For amplitude measures at each voxel, we
used the FFT-based ALFF (2, 17, 43) and its normalized variant, fALFF (44).
Standard image preprocessing was performed (i.e., motion correction,
spatial ﬁltering with FWHM = 6 mm, 12-dof afﬁne transformation to MNI152
stereotactic space). For seed-based correlation approaches and dual regression following ICA analysis, nuisance signals (e.g., global signal, WM, CSF,
motion parameters) were regressed out. Temporal ﬁltering was tailored for
each analytic approach (29, 31, 32, 44).
ICA components for dual regression analyses were determined by (i) lowdimensional (20 components) temporal concatenation ICA carried out 25 times
(each with 18 participants randomly selected from each of 17 centers with
minimum of 165 time points) and (ii) low-dimensional (20 components) metaICA, a second concatenation-based ICA using the component sets produced by
the 25 runs (see SI Results for a description of an alternative method). For each
participant, dual regression (32–34) was performed using the 20 components
identiﬁed by the meta-ICA (Fig. S3), yielding a connectivity map for each
component.
Aggregate statistical analyses of center, sex, and age effects were based on
a generalized linear model implementation of one-way ANOVA (factor:
center; covariates: age and sex). To identify functional boundaries, we calculated voxelwise coefﬁcients of variation across all 1,093 participants, and
ranked each voxel based on the absolute value of its coefﬁcient of variation.

Resting-state fMRI scans were aggregated from 35 community-based datasets
(n = 1,414). The present analysis was restricted to 24 centers (n = 1,093; 21
published, 3 unpublished; mean age <60 years; only participants over age 18;
one scan per participant; duration: 2.2–20 min; n = 970 at 3 T, n = 123 at 1.5 T;
voxel size, 1.5–5mm within plane; slice thickness, 3–8 mm). Each contributor’s
respective ethics committee approved submission of deidentiﬁed data. The
institutional review boards of NYU Langone Medical Center and New Jersey
Medical School approved the receipt and dissemination of the data.
For functional connectivity, we used seed-based correlation analysis, based on
six previously identiﬁed seed regions (31), and model-free ICA, using temporal

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank David Kennedy and www.nitrc.org for supporting the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project data release, Avi Snyder for
providing helpful insights and advice concerning project goals, and Cameron
Craddock for helpful advice on this study. Financial support for the 1000
Functional Connectomes project was provided by grants from the National
Institutes of Mental Health (R01MH083246 and R01MH081218 to F.X.C. and
M.P.M.), National Institute on Drug Abuse (R03DA024775, to C.K.;
R01DA016979, to F.X.C.), Autism Speaks, National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke (R01NS049176, to B.B.), and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute (to J.S.A. and R.L.B.), as well as gifts to the NYU Child Study Center
from the Stavros Niarchos Foundation, Leon Levy Foundation, Joseph P.
Healy, Linda and Richard Schaps, and Jill and Bob Smith and an endowment
provided by Phyllis Green and Randolph Cōwen. NITRC is funded by the
National Institutes of Health’s Blueprint for Neurosciences Research (neuroscienceblueprint.nih.gov) (Contract N02-EB-6-4281, to TCG, Inc.).

1. Wise J (2008) Consortium hopes to sequence genome of 1000 volunteers. BMJ 336:
237.
2. Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS (1995) Functional connectivity in the
motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn Reson Med 34:
537–541.
3. Fox MD, Raichle ME (2007) Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed with
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:700–711.
4. Margulies DS, et al. (2007) Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate
cortex. Neuroimage 37:579–588.
5. Smith SM, et al. (2009) Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during
activation and rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:13040–13045.
6. Van Dijk KR, et al. (2010) Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human
connectomics: Theory, properties, and optimization. J Neurophysiol 103:297–321.
7. Sporns O, Tononi G, Kötter R (2005) The human connectome: A structural description
of the human brain. PLOS Comput Biol 1:e42.
8. Shehzad Z, et al. (2009) The resting brain: Unconstrained yet reliable. Cereb Cortex 19:
2209–2229.
9. Zuo XN, et al. (2010) Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-restest evaluation
using ICA and dual regression approach. Neuroimage 49:2163–2177.
10. Zuo XN, et al. (2010) The oscillating brain: Complex and reliable. Neuroimage 49:
1432–1445.
11. He Y, et al. (2009) Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain
activity in humans. PLoS One 4:e5226.
12. Buckner RL, et al. (2009) Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity:
Mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 29:
1860–1873.
13. Morcom AM, Fletcher PC (2007) Does the brain have a baseline? Why we should be
resisting a rest. Neuroimage 37:1073–1082.
14. Damoiseaux JS, et al. (2006) Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:13848–13853.
15. Castellanos FX, et al. (2008) Cingulate precuneus interactions: A new locus of
dysfunction in adult attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 63:
332–337.
16. Church JA, et al. (2009) Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show
immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity. Brain 132:225–238.
17. Zang YF, et al. (2007) Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed
by resting-state functional MRI. Brain Dev 29:83–91.
18. Rombouts SA, et al. (2009) Model-free group analysis shows altered BOLD FMRI
networks in dementia. Hum Brain Mapp 30:256–266.

19. Kelly AMC, et al. (2009) Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity
from late childhood to early adulthood. Cereb Cortex 19:640–657.
20. Supekar K, Musen M, Menon V (2009) Development of large-scale functional brain
networks in children. PLoS Biol 7:e1000157.
21. Fair DA, et al. (2009) Functional brain networks develop from a “local to distributed”
organization. PLoS Comput Biol 5:e1000381.
22. Andrews-Hanna JR, et al. (2007) Disruption of large-scale brain systems in advanced
aging. Neuron 56:924–935.
23. Hagmann P, et al. (2008) Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS
Biol 6:e159.
24. Vincent JL, et al. (2007) Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey
brain. Nature 447:83–86.
25. Margulies DS, et al. (2009) Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in
humans and monkeys. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:20069–20074.
26. Fukunaga M, et al. (2006) Large-amplitude, spatially correlated ﬂuctuations in BOLD
fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages. Magn Reson Imaging 24:
979–992.
27. Greicius MD, et al. (2008) Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light
sedation. Hum Brain Mapp 29:839–847.
28. Achard S, Bullmore E (2007) Efﬁciency and cost of economical brain functional
networks. PLoS Comput Biol 3:e17.
29. Kelly C, et al. (2009) L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and
motor networks: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Neurosci 29:7364–7378.
30. Gusnard DA, Raichle ME, Raichle ME (2001) Searching for a baseline: Functional
imaging and the resting human brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:685–694.
31. Fox MD, et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9673–9678.
32. Beckmann CF, DeLuca M, Devlin JT, Smith SM (2005) Investigations into resting-state
connectivity using independent component analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
360:1001–1013.
33. Filippini N, et al. (2009) Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the
APOE-epsilon4 allele. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:7209–7214.
34. Calhoun VD, Pekar JJ, Pearlson GD (2004) Alcohol intoxication effects on simulated
driving: Exploring alcohol-dose effects on brain activation using functional MRI.
Neuropsychopharmacology 29:2097–3017.
35. Liu H, Stufﬂebeam SM, Sepulcre J, Hedden T, Buckner RL (2009) Evidence from
intrinsic activity that asymmetry of the human brain is controlled by multiple factors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:20499–20503.
36. Ellegren H, Parsch J (2007) The evolution of sex-biased genes and sex-biased gene
expression. Nat Rev Genet 8:689–698.

Methods

Biswal et al.

PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 6

NEUROSCIENCE

the origins and biological signiﬁcance of spontaneous low-frequency
ﬂuctuations of neuronal and hemodynamic activity, the impact of
intrinsic activity on evoked responses (and vice versa), and the ideal
means of acquiring, processing, and analyzing R-fMRI data. Nevertheless, the potential of discovery science is vast, from the development of objective measures of brain functional integrity to help
guide clinical diagnoses and decision-making, to tracking treatment
response and assessing the efﬁcacy of treatment interventions.
Finally, whereas the present work examines functional connectivity
alone, future studies may combine R-fMRI with other modalities (e.
g., EEG, magnetoencephalography, diffusion-tensor imaging,
volumetrics) and genetics to achieve a more complete understanding of the human brain.
All data and analytic tools used in the present work will be made
available at www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/. We anticipate that
the open availability of the 1000 Functional Connectomes dataset will
recruit the broad participation and collaboration among the scientiﬁc
community necessary for successful implementation of discoverybased science of human brain function. In addition, we hope that it
will further advance the ethos of data sharing and collaboration initiated by such efforts as fMRIDC (www.fmridc.org), FBIRN (www.
birncommunity.org), OASIS (www.oasis-brains.org), BrainScape
(www.brainscape.org), and BrainMap (www.brainmap.org).

37. Goldstein JM, et al. (2001) Normal sexual dimorphism of the adult human brain
assessed by in vivo magnetic resonance imaging. Cereb Cortex 11:490–497.
38. Gur RC, et al. (1995) Sex differences in regional cerebral glucose metabolism during a
resting state. Science 267:528–531.
39. Zeng SM, Yankowitz J, Widness JA, Strauss RG (2001) Etiology of differences in hematocrit
between males and females: Sequence-based polymorphisms in erythropoietin and its
receptor. J Gend Specif Med 4:35–40.
40. Lenroot RK, et al. (2007) Sexual dimorphism of brain developmental trajectories
during childhood and adolescence. Neuroimage 36:1065–1073.
41. Protopopescu X, et al. (2008) Hippocampal structural changes across the menstrual
cycle. Hippocampus 18:985–988.
42. McEwen BS (1999) Permanence of brain sex differences and structural plasticity of the
adult brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:7128–7130.
43. Cordes D, et al. (2001) Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the
cerebral cortex in “resting-state” data. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:1326–1333.

6 of 6 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0911855107

44. Zou QH, et al. (2008) An improved approach to detection of amplitude of lowfrequency ﬂuctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: Fractional ALFF. J Neurosci
Methods 172:137–141.
45. Cohen AL, et al. (2008) Deﬁning functional areas in individual human brains using
resting functional connectivity MRI. Neuroimage 41:45–57.
46. Roy AK, et al. (2009) Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using restingstate fMRI. Neuroimage 45:614–626.
47. Albert NB, Robertson EM, Miall RC (2009) The resting human brain and motor
learning. Curr Biol 19:1023–1027.
48. Harrison BJ, et al. (2008) Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood
induction. PLoS ONE 3:e1794.
49. Lettre G (2009) Genetic regulation of adult stature. Curr Opin Pediatr 21:515–522.
50. Manolio TA, et al. (2009) Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases. Nature
461:747–753.

Biswal et al.

Supporting Information
Biswal et al. 10.1073/pnas.0911855107
SI Methods
Image Preprocessing. Overview. All available resting-state scans were

preprocessed using both AFNI (1) and FSL (www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk).
Speciﬁc commands can be found in the preprocessing scripts that
will be released at www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/ on publication of this paper. After the ﬁrst ﬁve time points of every scan
were discarded, to remove possible T1 stabilization effects, the
data were corrected for motion by aligning each volume to the
mean image volume using Fourier interpolation in AFNI. Then
the data were spatially smoothed using a 6-mm FWHM Gaussian
kernel. Mean-based intensity normalization was done by scaling all
volumes by the same factor (10,000).
Seed-based correlation analyses. The data were temporally ﬁltered
using both a high-pass (Gaussian-weighted least squares straightline ﬁtting, with σ = 100.0 s) and low-pass (Gaussian low-pass
temporal ﬁltering, with a HWHM of 2.8 s) ﬁlter, followed by
linear detrending to remove any residual drift.
Independent component analysis. Temporal concatenation group analysis.

Consistent with common practice, temporal ﬁltering for ICA
analyses was limited to high-pass ﬁltering (Gaussian-weighted least
squares straight-line ﬁtting, with σ = 100.0 s).
Dual regression. This step used the same preprocessed data as used
in the seed-based correlation analyses.
ALFF/fALFF. No temporal ﬁltering was carried out, because the data
were examined in the frequency domain within select bands (2, 3).
Temporal despiking with a hyperbolic tangent squashing function
was performed, however, to limit extreme values. Linear trends
were then removed from the data.
Registration and normalization. After the skull was removed using
AFNI, registration of each individual’s high-resolution anatomic
image to a common stereotactic space [the Montreal Neurological
Institute’s 152-brain template (MNI152); 3 mm isotropic voxel size]
was done using a 12–degrees of freedom linear afﬁne transformation (FLIRT) (4, 5). The resulting transformation was then
applied to each individual’s functional dataset. We did not further
optimize the normalization with a nonlinear algorithm, because of
concerns about image quality and limited coverage in some datasets.
Functional Connectivity: Seed-Based Correlation Analysis. Nuisance
signal regression. Consistent with common practice in the R-

fMRI literature, nuisance signals were removed from the data via
multiple regression before functional connectivity analyses were
performed. This step is designed to control for the effects of
physiological processes, such as ﬂuctuations related to motion and
cardiac and respiratory cycles. Speciﬁcally, each individual’s 4D
time series data were regressed on nine predictors: white matter
(WM), cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), the global signal, and six motion
parameters. The global signal regressor was generated by averaging across the time series of all voxels in the brain. The WM and
CSF covariates were generated by segmenting each individual’s
high-resolution structural image (using FAST in FSL). The resulting segmented WM and CSF images were thresholded to
ensure 80% tissue type probability. These thresholded masks were
then applied to each individual’s time series, and a mean time
series was calculated by averaging across time series of all voxels
within each mask. The six motion parameters were calculated in
the motion-correction step during preprocessing. Movement in
each of the three cardinal directions (X, Y, and Z) and rotational
movement around three axes (pitch, yaw, and roll) were included
for each individual.
Seed selection. Six 7.5-mm-radius seed regions of interest (ROIs)
(containing 33 voxels) centered on the coordinates previously used
Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

by Fox et al. (6) were created to examine functional connectivity
for each of six regions, three regions within the “task-positive”
network and three within the “default mode” network. The ROIs
within the task-positive network were located in the IPS (-25, -57,
46), the middle temporal region (MT+; -45, -69, -2), and the right
frontal eye ﬁeld (FEF) region of the precentral sulcus (25, -13,
50). The default mode network seed ROIs were located in the left
lateral parietal cortex (LP; -45, -67, 36), medial prefrontal cortex
(MPF; -1, 47, -4), and PCC (-5, -49, 40).
Individual seed-based functional connectivity analysis. First, each individual’s residual 4D time series data were spatially normalized by
applying the previously computed transformation to the MNI152
standard space. Then the time series for each seed was extracted
from these data. Time series were averaged across all voxels in
each seed’s ROI. For each individual dataset, the correlation
between the time series of the seed ROI and that of each voxel in
the brain was determined. This analysis was implemented using
3dﬁm+ (AFNI) to produce individual-level correlation maps of
all voxels that were positively or negatively correlated with the
seed’s time series. Finally, these individual-level correlation maps
were converted to Z-value maps using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation.
Functional Connectivity: Independent Component Analysis. Overview.

Temporal-concatenation group ICA (TC-GICA) was used to
generate group-level components for the dataset (7) using MELODIC (FSL). Given computational resource limitations (e.g., 32
GB of physical memory), as well as a number of centers with a
small number of time points due to repetition times >2.0 s, each
TC-GICA run was applied to a dataset consisting of 18 participants/center from the 17 centers that collected a minimum of 165
functional volumes per scan. This approach also ensured that a
single center’s data would not drive the ICA components detected. Consistent with recent work on low-dimensional ICA (8),
the number of components was ﬁxed at 20. Given the potential for
such factors as initial random values and subject sampling to affect
ICA results, 25 TC-GICA analyses were performed, each using a
unique resampling from each of the 17 centers. A meta-ICA
analysis was then carried out across the 25 runs to extract the 20
spatially independent components consistently identiﬁed across
the 25 runs. An alternative hierarchical clustering approach based
on ICASSO (9) is described below. The two approaches yielded
similar results. Dual regression (10, 11) was then carried out using
the 20 resulting components as templates, to produce individual
participant maps for each of the 20 components.
TC-GICA. Speciﬁcally, TC-GICA comprised ﬁve fundamental steps:
1. Each individual’s preprocessed data were ﬁrst truncated to
the same number of time points (i.e., 165 EPI volumes).
2. A bootstrapping dataset was generated by randomly choosing 18 individual datasets per center, resulting in 306 individual functional datasets.
3. All 306 individual functional datasets were spatially averaged in MNI152 standard space and then used to estimate
the mean covariance matrix.
4. The number of components was set at 20, and all individual
functional data were projected into a subspace spanned by
the ﬁrst 20 eigenvectors of the mean covariance matrix,
resulting in reduced individual fMRI data (in a common
subspace).
1 of 10

5. All 306 reduced individual datasets were temporally concatenated, reduced via principal component analysis to 20
dimensions, and fed into the probabilistic ICA algorithm
with a random initial value (12).
This procedure produced 20 group-level components for each
TC-GICA run. Finally, 500 (20 × 25) group-level components
were generated from the 25 TC-GICA runs.
Generation of component templates for dual regression (meta-ICA). To
provide more accurate and robust ICA component templates, we
carried out another low-dimensional (20 components) TC-GICA.
Here we concatenated the 500 components produced by the 25
TC-GICA runs as the input data of a single-session ICA in
MELODIC. The resultant maps were used as ﬁnal component
templates for the dual regression procedure. Of note, this method
was selected as the primary approach over the alternative
approach described because it guarantees the spatial independence of the 20 components, whereas the alternative approach
does not.
Generation of component templates for dual regression model (alternative
approach). To emphasize the robustness of the ﬁndings of the meta-

ICA, here we describe an alternative approach that yields nearly
identical components to the meta-ICA. The ﬁndings of the two
approaches differed notably for only one of the 20 components,
for which the meta-ICA ﬁnding was more plausible. Given the
high degree of similarity between the two methods, we present
only the ﬁndings from the meta-ICA in the present work. In the
alternative approach, we used the hierarchical clustering algorithm implemented in the ICASSO toolbox (9). ICASSO was
designed for validating the robustness of ICA with respect to
random initial values (of the ICA mixing matrix) and the ICA
cost function optimization search strategy. However, due to
limitations in computational resources (e.g., 32 GB of memory in
the present work), TC-GICA cannot be carried out on the full
datasets. Thus, we used the bootstrapping approach described
above with 25 ICA analyses, in which initial values and the
speciﬁc participants selected from each center varied from one
ICA analysis to the next. Here the 500 group-level components
(20 components per run × 25 runs) were sorted using hierarchical clustering. The number of clusters (20) was selected to
match the number of components. The similarity between
components was measured by the combination of both spatial Rs
and temporal Rt correlations in Eq. (1) and the distance between
components as deﬁned in Eq. (2) (13):
Sði; jÞ ¼ λ∗ Rs ði; jÞ þ ð1 − λÞ∗ Rt ði; jÞ
Dði; jÞ ¼

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 − Sði; jÞ; 1≤i; j≤500

(1)
(2)

Considering the spatial ICA, λ =0.8 was chosen in our clustering
procedure. Finally, the median value at each voxel for each of
the 20 clusters was calculated to determine the ﬁnal component
templates for the dual regression procedure.
Individual component reconstruction via the dual regression model. To
reconstruct component maps for each participant, the recently
developed dual regression procedure (11, 14) was applied to each
of the 1,093 individual participants’ datasets. Speciﬁcally, in the
present work, dual regression consisted of two linear regressions
carried out independently for each of the 20 component maps
identiﬁed in temporal concatenation ICA. For each component
template, the ﬁrst regression model used the template as a
spatial predictor for the participant’s 4D data, producing a set of
individual regression weights in the time domain (i.e., a time
series for each spatial map). Using this time series as a temporal
predictor for the 4D BOLD data, the second regression equation
estimated the individual regression weights in the spatial domain
(i.e., the participant-level individual spatial map). Both regressions used the same data set used for the seed-based conBiswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

nectivity approaches, that is, each participant’s 4D dataset after
removal of the nine nuisance covariates. Component time series
were demeaned in both regressions, but no variance normalization was used. The dual regression procedure was carried out
for all 1,093 participants included across 24 centers, not just
those used for the generation of ICA-based templates. For each
component, these individual spatial maps were then used to
evaluate group-level statistics.
Amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency ﬂuctuations. To examine the
potentially meaningful information contained within the ALFF,
two fast-Fourier transformation (FFT)-based indices, ALFF and
fALFF, were used to compute the amplitude of low-frequency
ﬂuctuations in the frequency domain (2, 3, 15). For each individual,
ALFF and fALFF were computed to identify those voxels with
signiﬁcantly detectable low-frequency ﬂuctuation amplitudes.
Speciﬁcally, at each voxel, ALFF is calculated as the sum of amplitudes within a speciﬁc low frequency range (0.01–0.1 Hz).
fALFF is the normalized ALFF, calculated by dividing the ALFF
value by the total sum of amplitudes across the entire frequency
range measured in a given time series. Voxelwise ALFF and
fALFF maps were calculated for each participant in native space,
and then transformed into the MNI152 standard brain space with
3-mm isotropic voxel size. Before statistical analyses, each individual ALFF or fALFF map was Z-transformed (i.e., by subtracting the mean voxelwise ALFF or fALFF obtained for the
individual’s entire brain, and then dividing by the corresponding
SD) to improve its suitability for group-level parametric analyses.
The individual Z-transformed ALFF or fALFF maps were used in
subsequent group- and center-level analyses.
Uniﬁed group-level statistical model. For all three types of R-fMRI
measures (seed-based correlations, ICA, and ALFF/fALFF), a
uniﬁed general linear model frame was developed for center-level
statistical analyses. The uniﬁed statistical model is a one-way
ANOVA, treating centers as the between factor. F-contrasts were
used to measure the effect of centers. Overall group mean
contrasts across all centers were modeled as well. Speciﬁcally, a
one-factor 24-level ANOVA (factor: center; 1,093 participants),
with age and sex as covariates, was used to examine the effects of
age, sex, and center on the three R-fMRI measures. Multiple
comparisons were corrected at the cluster level using Gaussian
random ﬁeld theory (min Z > 2.3; cluster signiﬁcance: P < 0.05,
corrected).
SI Results
Center-Related Variability. The results presented in Fig. 1 show that
the effects ascribable to center can be either interpreted as negligible, as indicated by the high between-center Kendall’s W (row 2),
or substantial, accounting for much of the variance (row 3). These
opposite interpretations are not mutually exclusive. The high between-center Kendall’s W indicates that the resting-state measures
(i.e., functional connectivity, ﬂuctuation amplitude) obtained from
different centers have a high degree of similarity. Nevertheless,
systematic differences exist between centers, and these are easily
quantiﬁed by ANOVA. In Fig. S5 for each center, the mean functional connectivity across 40 peak voxels derived from the center
effect map for the PCC seed is depicted. As the ﬁgure shows, there
are between-center differences in the height of the functional connectivity values. Some centers have overall higher functional connectivity values than others; these differences in the height of
functional connectivity values drive the signiﬁcant between-center
effects. The variability in functional connectivity values could be
related to a number of factors (e.g., the speciﬁc scanner used,
scanner sequence, sample characteristics, speciﬁc instructions to
participants, degree of variability in participant wakefulness). Because there was no previous coordination among centers regarding
scanning parameters, each of these parameters could contribute to
across-center differences. Speciﬁc examination of these factors is
beyond the scope of the present work, but we anticipate that it will be
2 of 10

Effect of Sample Size on the Relationship Between RSFC and Age. We
investigated the effect of sample size on the strength of the correlation between RSFC and age in two regions identiﬁed by our group
analyses. For this purpose, we randomly sampled participants from
the entire study sample using subgroups of 10–1,090 individuals (of
the total 1,093 participants), then calculated the correlation be-

tween age and connectivity strength for each subgroup. We repeated this procedure 10,000 times to optimize randomization.
Finally, we calculated the mean correlation and SD across the
10,000 iterations. As shown in Fig. S6, the variability in the observed
correlation naturally decreased as a function of sample size, with a
tipping point observed when samples exceeded ∼100–200 participants. This suggests that results obtained with sample sizes that
have been presumed to be sufﬁcient (e.g., 50 participants) are likely
to lead to false-negative results for small effects.

1. Cox RW (1996) AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic
resonance neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res 29:162–173.
2. Zang YF, et al. (2007) Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed
by resting-state functional MRI. Brain Dev 29:83–91.
3. Zou QH, et al. (2008) An improved approach to detection of amplitude of lowfrequency ﬂuctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: Fractional ALFF. J Neurosci
Methods 172:137–141.
4. Jenkinson M, Smith S (2001) A global optimisation method for robust afﬁne
registration of brain images. Med Image Anal 5:143–156.
5. Jenkinson M, Bannister P, Brady M, Smith S (2002) Improved optimization for the
robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images.
Neuroimage 17:825–841.
6. Fox MD, et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9673–9678.
7. Beckmann CF, DeLuca M, Devlin JT, Smith SM (2005) Investigations into resting-state
connectivity using independent component analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
360:1001–1013.

8. Smith SM, et al. (2009) Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during
activation and rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:13040–13045.
9. Himberg J, Hyvärinen A, Esposito F (2004) Validating the independent components of
neuroimaging time series via clustering and visualization. Neuroimage 22:1214–1222.
10. Filippini N, et al. (2009) Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the
APOE-epsilon4 allele. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:7209–7214.
11. Calhoun VD, Pekar JJ, Pearlson GD (2004) Alcohol intoxication effects on simulated
driving: Exploring alcohol-dose effects on brain activation using functional MRI.
Neuropsychopharmacology 29:2097–3017.
12. Beckmann CF, Smith SM (2004) Probabilistic independent component analysis for
functional magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 23:137–152.
13. Esposito F, et al. (2005) Independent component analysis of fMRI group studies by
self-organizing clustering. Neuroimage 25:193–205.
14. Filippini N, et al. (2009) Regional atrophy of transcallosal prefrontal connections in
cognitively normal APOE epsilon4 carriers. J Magn Reson Imaging 29:1021–1026.
15. Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS (1995) Functional connectivity in the motor
cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn Reson Med 34:537–541.

the focus of future studies. Fortunately, as demonstrated by our
analyses, these sources of variation did not preclude us from being
able to effectively pool data and carry out discovery-based analyses.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

3 of 10

Fig. S1. Center-, age-, and sex-related variations detected in R-fMRI measures of functional connectivity using seed-based correlation analyses. The ﬁrst
column depicts group-level functional connectivity maps for three representative “default mode” seeds (A) and three “task-positive” network seeds (B). The
seed ROIs are shown as white circles. The second column depicts voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center, as detected by one-way ANOVA (across 24
centers, including 1,093 participants). Columns 3 and 4 depict voxels exhibiting age- and sex-related variations (modeled as covariates). Center, sex, and age
ﬁndings were corrected for multiple comparisons (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05, corrected). All supplementary cortical surface maps are arrayed as shown in Fig. 1, with
lateral views in upper rows, medial views in lower rows, left hemisphere on the left, and right hemisphere on the right. “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater
connectivity in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in females. “Older” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with
increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with decreasing age. “Pos”, positive functional connectivity; “neg”, negative
functional connectivity.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

4 of 10

Fig. S2. Center-, age-, and sex-related differences detected in R-fMRI measures of functional connectivity combining independent component and dual regression analyses. The ﬁrst column depicts group-level maps for 20 functional connectivity ICs. For each component, the second column depicts voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center, as detected by one-way ANOVA (across 24 centers, including 1,093 participants). Columns 3 and 4 depict voxels exhibiting
age- and sex-related variations. Center, age and sex ﬁndings were corrected for multiple comparisons (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05, corrected). “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in females. “Older” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing
connectivity with increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with decreasing age. “Pos,” positive group effect: “neg,”
negative group effect.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

5 of 10

Fig. S3. IC templates used for dual regression analyses. Independent component maps resulting from the meta-ICA analysis shown on standard brain views (A)
and surface maps (B). Component maps were thresholded at P > 0.05 using spatial mixture modeling. Peak coordinates of each IC’s activity are displayed in the
lower right corner of each grid panel (MNI152 standard space).

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

6 of 10

Fig. S4. Consistency of R-fMRI measures across centers: ICA combined with dual regression (A), and seed-based correlation (B). For each center, the voxelwise mean and coefﬁcient of variation was calculated for each R-fMRI measure. The Kendall’s W concordance of the mean or coefﬁcient of variation maps
between any two centers was calculated. The coefﬁcient of variation is depicted above the diagonal, the mean below.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

7 of 10

Fig. S5. Functional connectivity values observed at peak locations of between-center differences. For each center we calculated the mean across a 3 mm
radius sphere centered at each of the 40 most signiﬁcant voxels indexing the effect of center for the PCC seed ROI (Fig. 1, column 1, row 3). Connectivity values
indexed the functional connectivity between the 3 mm radius sphere and the PCC seed ROI. All centers included in the analyses are shown (n = 24). Although
the strength of functional connectivity values observed across centers clearly varies, the within-center variability is relatively low. This indicates that the
differences in functional connectivity strength among centers are relatively stable across the brain. A center that shows higher functional connectivity in one
area of the brain compared with another center most likely also shows higher functional connectivity in other areas of the brain.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

8 of 10

Fig. S6. Effect of sample size on the correlation between age and RSFC. Shown is the mean correlation ± 2 SD across 10,000 calculations of the correlation
between age and functional connectivity strength as a function of sample size. For each of the two regions illustrating the effect of age for the PCC seed ROI in
Fig. 2, we calculated the correlation between age and RSFC as a function of sample size. We randomly sampled subgroups, ranging in size from 10 to 1,090
participants, from the total of 1,093 participants. We then calculated the correlation between age and RSFC for each of the subgroups. This procedure was
iterated 10,000 times to optimize randomization. (A) Mean correlation ± 2 times the SD across 10,000 iterations for the region illustrated in Fig. 2 that showed
a positive correlation between age and RSFC with the PCC seed. (B) Mean correlation ± 2 times the SD across the 10,000 iterations for the region illustrated in
Fig. 2 that showed a negative correlation between age and RSFC with the PCC seed. In each ﬁgure, the actually observed correlation is indicated on the y-axis in
a smaller font.

Fig. S7. Center-, age-, and sex-related variations in R-fMRI amplitude measures. The ﬁrst column depicts group-level maps for voxelwise measures of ALFF
(Upper) and fALFF (Lower). Before group-level analyses, each participant’s ALFF/fALFF map is Z-transformed, such that positive voxels reﬂect greater lowfrequency ﬂuctuation amplitudes than baseline (whole brain mean) and negative voxels reﬂect low-frequency ﬂuctuation amplitudes below baseline. The
second column depicts voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center, as detected by one-way ANOVA (across 24 centers, including 1,093 participants). Columns
3 and 4 depict voxels exhibiting age- and sex-related variations. Center, age, and sex ﬁndings were corrected for multiple comparisons (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05,
corrected). “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in females. “Older” refers
to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with decreasing age.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

9 of 10

Table S1. Data currently included in the 1,000 Functional Connectomes Project

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Center

PI

N

Baltimore, MD
Bangor, UK
Beijing, China
Beijing, China
Berlin, Germany
Bethesda, MD
Cambridge, MA
Cambridge, MA
Cleveland, OH
Dallas, TX
Hvidovre, Denmark
Leiden, The Netherlands
Leipzig, Germany
Magdeburg, Germany
Milwaukee, WI
New Haven, CT
†
New York, NY
†
New York, NY
Newark, NJ
‡
Orangeburg, NY
‡
Oulu, Finland
Oxford, UK
Queensland, Australia
St. Louis, MO

J. J. Pekar/S. H. Mostofsky
S. Colcombe
YF. Zang
XC. Weng
D. Margulies
M. Ernst
R. L. Buckner
S. Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli
M. J. Lowe
B. Rypma
A.-M. Dogonowski/K. Madsen
S. A. R. B. Rombouts
A. Villringer
M. Walter
SJ. Li
M. Hampson
M. Milham/F. X. Castellanos
M. Milham/F. X. Castellanos
B. B. Biswal
M. J. Hoptman
V. J. Kiviniemi/J Veijola
S. M. Smith/C. Mackay
K. McMahon
B. L. Schlaggar/S. E. Petersen

23
20
198
28
26
18
198
39
31
24
28
31
37
29
64
19
59
20
19
21
103
22
19
31

n*

193
27

35

28
18

20

18

Age
years, mean (SD)
29.26
23.4
21.16
20.41
29.77
33.00
21.03
25.09
43.55
42.63
41.75
22.19
26.22
30.43
53.59
31.61
32.78
29.75
24.11
40.65
21.52
29
26.28
25.1

(5.46)
(5.32)
(1.83)
(1.39)
(5.21)
(13.31)
(2.31)
(3.53)
(11.14)
(20.07)
(10.7)
(2.57)
(5)
(5.71)
(5.79)
(10.27)
(8.83)
(9.94)
(3.91)
(11.03)
(0.57)
(3.79)
(3.71)
(2.31)

Age range
years

Male sex
%

20–40
19–38
18–26
18–24
23–44
18–53
18–30
20–32
24–60
20–71
21–68
18–28
20–42
22–43
44–65
18–48
20–49
18–46
21–39
20–55
20–23
20–35
20–34
21–29

35%
100%
39%
27%
50%
22%
38%
49%
35%
50%
50%
74%
43%
93%
64%
56%
68%
40%
47%
75%
36%
55%
61%
45%

Data from the following centers will be included in the 1000 Functional Connectomes data release but are not included in the
current analyses: Ann Arbor, MI: C. S. Monk/R. D. Seidler/S. J. Peltier; Atlanta, GA: H. S. Mayberg; Berlin, Germany: S. Schmidt; Durham,
NC: D. J. Madden; Durham, NC: L. Wang; London, Ontario, Canada: P. Williamson; Munich, Germany, C. Sorg/V. Riedl; Nanjing, China:
GJ. Teng/HY. Zhang; Pittsburgh, PA: G.J. Siegle; Portland, OR: D. Fair/B. J. Nagel; Taipei, Taiwan: CP. Lin; Vienna, Austria: C. Windischberger.
*Actual number of participants included in the analysis, if different from N.
†
Data from the same magnet, different sequence.
‡
1.5-T magnet.
Funding sources for each contributor (numbered by site): 1: R01 MH085328, R01 MH078160, HD-24061 (Intellectual Disabilities
Research Center), M01 RR00052 (Johns Hopkins General Clinical Research Center) and P41 RR15241 (National Center for Research
Resources); 3: NSFC (No.30621130074); 4: Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2007CB512300); 5: Berlin School of Mind and
Brain (DFG); 7: Howard Hughes Medical Institute; 9: National Multiple Sclerosis Society; 13: Competence Net Stroke (BMBF) and Berlin
School of Mind and Brain (DFG); 17-18: NIDA (RO1DA016979), NIMH (RO1MH083246), Stavros Niarchos Foundation; 19: NINDS
(RO1NS049176); 20: R01 MH064783, R21 MH084031, R01 MH0663674; 21: Academy of Finland (Grant codes 124257, 212181,
214273); 23: Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery grant (DP0452264); 24: NIH NS053425; Atlanta, G.A.: H.S. Mayberg: URC
Grant, Emory University; Durham, NC: D.J. Madden: NIH/NIA R01 AG011622; Durham, NC: L. Wang: Paul B. Beeson Career Developmental Awards (K23-AG028982); Portland, OR: D. Fair/B. Nagel: Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Institute, Medical Research
Foundation, UNCF-Merck, Ford Foundation, Dana Foundation; Taipei, Taiwan: C-P. Lin: National Health Research Institute grant (NHRIEX98-9813EC), Taiwan; Vienna, Austria: C. Windischberger: OeNB-P11468 and OeNB-P12982.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

10 of 10

