Functional connectivity analysis reveals disrupted interhemispheric connectivity in unilateral neocortical epilepsy

1

Edward J Novotny1,2, Andrew Poliakov3, Sandra Poliachik3, Seth Friedman3, Dennis Shaw3, and Jeffrey Ojemann1,4
Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 2Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Radiology, Seattle Children's
Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Neurosurgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA

Introduction: Functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI) – an analysis technique based on task-free, resting state fMRI recording -- can
demonstrate disruption of connectivity in certain disease states, including epilepsy. In healthy controls, fcMRI reveals strong
interhemispheric connectivity in such systems as sensory-motor, visual, auditory, as well as dorsal attention and default mode
networks. We applied this technique to several patients with intractable epilepsy being considered for surgical resection due to
unilateral involvement of the disorder in such conditions that include Sturge-Weber, Rasmussen syndrome, peri-natal cerebral infarct
and malformations of cortical development.
Methods: Seventeen subjects with medically intractable epilepsy being considered for epilepsy surgery were studied using fcMRI as
part of a comprehensive epilepsy evaluation that included high-resolution anatomical MRI at 3T, FDG-PET, video/EEG monitoring
with ictal recordings, Neuropsychological and developmental testing. There were 5 male subjects and the mean age was 7 years with
the age range from 0.1 to 18 years. The imaging was performed on a Siemens (Erlangen, Germany) system, 3-Tesla (Trio) scanner
with the following sequence (EPIBOLD sequence, TE=30ms, flip angle = 90°). Resting state fMRI scan were performed in both
awake and anesthetized patients. The fcMRI study was incorporated into either clinical anatomical MRI or tasked-based fMRI studies
that were part of their routine presurgical evaluation. Awake patients were instructed to relax and rest while keeping their eyes open.
Analysis was performed using 1000 Functional Connectomes Project scripts based on AFNI and FSL software packages. Resting
state data were analyzed for connectivity with the following seeds: Somatomotor (MNI coordinates: ), (±39, -27, 51); Visual V1(±18,
-72, 12); Auditory A1(±60, -12, 0); Default Mode/posterior cingulate cortex PCC(±6, -48, 39). In patients with anatomical anomalies,
the location of the fixed coordinate was confirmed to be on the appropriate brain region by a clinical neuroscience physician.
Results: All subjects with epilepsy had significant disruptions in functional connectivity involving one or more resting state
networks. These changes included marked asymmetries of networks, impairment of interhemispheric connectivity and aberrant
patterns of activation when compared to controls without epilepsy.
The figure shows connectivity patterns in a 2 y/o patient with
left hemisphere cortical dysplasia. While some
interhemispheric connectivity remained in somatomotor (SM)
and auditory (A1) systems, it was disrupted in Visual (V1) and
default mode (PCC) networks.
Conclusions: Resting state functional connectivity patterns are
well documented in healthy subjects. In patients with epilepsy,
such data is limited and has only recently been applied to
patients being considered for epilepsy surgery (1,2) and other
epilepsy syndromes.

We studied a number of such patients, and found that
interhemispheric connectivity is clearly disrupted. This can be
either limited to select systems or show broad disconnect between
the two hemispheres. We may see broadening of connectivity in
the diseased area. This disruption of interhemispheric connectivity
happens despite intact callosal connections and suggests
mechanisms beyond simple structural connections are necessary to
drive functional networks. These preliminary results show promise
for the application of fcMRI to the presurgical evaluation of
patients with epilepsy and investigating the relationship of the
fcMRI findings to surgical outcome and comorbid
neuropsychological dysfunction.

Proc. Intl. Soc. Mag. Reson. Med. 20 (2012)

3665

References:
1.
Negishi M. Martuzzi R. Novotny EJ. Spencer DD. Constable RT.
Functional MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome
of epilepsy. Epilepsia. 52(9):1733-40, 2011.
2.
Bettus G, Ranjeva JP, Wendling F, Bénar CG, Confort-Gouny S,
Régis J, Chauvel P, Cozzone PJ, Lemieux L, Bartolomei F, Guye M.
Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks
assessed by intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal fluctuations.PLoS
One. 2011;6(5):e20071.

