Research Report
Occasional Paper

Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI):
An Invaluable Tool in
Translational Neuroscience
Lori A. Whitten
December 2012

RTI Press

About the Author
Lori A. Whitten, PhD, is a science
writer in the Knowledge Translation
and Strategic Communication
group in RTI International’s Social,
Statistical, and Environmental
Sciences unit.

RTI Press publication OP-0010-1212
This PDF document was made available from www.rti.org as a public service
of RTI International. More information about RTI Press can be found at
http://www.rti.org/rtipress.
RTI International is an independent, nonprofit research organization dedicated
to improving the human condition by turning knowledge into practice. The
RTI Press mission is to disseminate information about RTI research, analytic
tools, and technical expertise to a national and international audience. RTI Press
publications are peer-reviewed by at least two independent substantive experts
and one or more Press editors.
Suggested Citation

Whitten, L. A. (2012). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI):
An invaluable tool in translational neuroscience. RTI Press publication
No. OP-0010-1212. Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI Press. Retrieved from
http://www.rti.org/rtipress.

This publication is part of the
RTI Research Report series.
Occasional Papers are scholarly
essays on policy, methods, or other
topics relevant to RTI areas of
research or technical focus.
RTI International
3040 Cornwallis Road
PO Box 12194
Research Triangle Park, NC
27709-2194 USA
Tel:
Fax:
E-mail:
Web site:

+1.919.541.6000
+1.919.541.5985
rtipress@rti.org
www.rti.org

©2012 Research Triangle Institute. RTI International is a trade name of Research Triangle
Institute.
All rights reserved. This report is protected by copyright. Credit must be provided to the author
and source of the document when the content is quoted. Neither the document nor partial or
entire reproductions may be sold without prior written permission from the publisher.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3768/rtipress.2012.op.0010.1212
www.rti.org/rtipress

Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI): An Invaluable Tool in
Translational Neuroscience
Lori A. Whitten

Contents
Neuroimaging: A Major Driver
of Neuroscience Research
Introduction

2
2

A Brain With a View: Functional
Neuroimaging
3
Neuroimaging: A New Driver of
Translational Neuroscience 4
fMRI as a Tool in the Diagnosis
and Treatment of
Neurobehavioral Problems 4
Importance of Integrating fMRI
With Other Approaches
8

Abstract
The sophisticated methods of neuroscience—including molecular genetics,
structural and functional neuroimaging, animal models, and experimental
tasks that approximate real-world behaviors in human research—have yielded
important insights about typical functioning and neurobehavioral disorders.
Translational neuroscience endeavors to use this knowledge to improve
the human condition by developing and improving interventions for these
disorders. This paper reviews the literature on the contribution of functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and two related techniques, resting-state
fMRI (rs-fMRI) and real-time fMRI (rt-fMRI), to the diagnosis and treatment of
behavioral problems and psychiatric disorders. It also explains how incorporating
neuroscience principles and techniques into research on the prevention of
substance misuse and antisocial behavior may spur advances and innovations
in this important area. This article argues that fMRI’s potential contribution to
these prevention efforts has yet to be fully realized, explores new ways in which
the technique could be adapted to that end, highlights some of the work by
researchers in the vanguard of this effort, and notes limitations of fMRI and
ethical concerns the technique raises.

Translational Neuroscience and
Prevention: Substance Misuse
9
and Antisocial Behavior
The Complex Etiology of
Substance Misuse and
Antisocial Behavior

10

Neurobehavioral Characteristics
Associated With Later
Substance Misuse and
Antisocial Behavior
11
fMRI Research on Substance
Misuse and Antisocial
Behavior, and Implications
12
for Prevention
Integrating fMRI into
Prevention Research

15

RTI International’s
Transdisciplinary Science
and Translational
Prevention Program

16

fMRI Limitations and
Neuroethics

17

Future Applications and
Conclusions

19

References

21

Acknowledgments Inside back cover

2

Whitten, 2012

Neuroimaging: A Major Driver of
Neuroscience Research
Introduction
What is the final frontier of human exploration?
Some, particularly neuroscientists, might answer
that it is the human brain—“inner space” rather than
outer space. During the 40 years since men walked on
the moon, scientists have accumulated a tremendous
wealth of knowledge about the brain, its functions,
its relationship with behavior, and its underlying
role in neurological and psychiatric diseases.
Researchers trained in many different disciplines—
including physiology, psychology, pharmacology,
molecular biology, psychiatry, and neurology—work
in neuroscience through a common passion to
determine how the brain and nervous system work.
No function or behavior appears too complex for
neuroscience to tackle—from how children learn
language (Kuhl, 2010) to the memory systems that
preserve our experiences and knowledge (Squire,
2009)—and advances continue at a breathtaking pace.
As in all areas of biomedical research, a crucial
challenge for neuroscientists is to translate the
knowledge derived from scientific inquiry into
practical tools or programs that improve people’s
lives. Translational neuroscientists strive to develop
interventions for neurological and psychiatric
disorders based on the latest brain and behavior
research. By understanding how brain structure and
function are influenced by genes, environmental
factors, and their interactions, translational
neuroscientists strive to alleviate the individual and
societal impact of neurobehavioral disorders.
A great deal of translational neuroscience resources
and efforts are dedicated to developing new
pharmacotherapies to treat debilitating neurological
and psychiatric disorders (e.g., dementia,
neurodegenerative diseases, autism, schizophrenia,
and depression). Other neuroscientists aim to
translate research on brain and behavior into
non-pharmacological treatments for psychiatric
and neurobehavioral disorders (e.g., behavioral
or cognitive therapies). Increasingly, biological
factors and their reciprocal interaction with

RTI Press

the environment are incorporated into work on
prevention and intervention for a wide range of
behavioral problems (Beauchaine, Neuhaus, Brenner,
& Gatzke-Kopp, 2008; Cicchetti & Gunnar, 2008;
van Goozen & Fairchild, 2008; Blair & Diamond,
2008; Fishbein & Tarter, 2009). Such work is based
on the well-established neuroscience principle of
brain plasticity—that is, the brain can change with
experience and environmental influences.
Functional neuroimaging techniques—various
types of scans that visualize brain activity—offer a
powerful set of tools for observing experience-related
changes. With functional neuroimaging, researchers
can look at the brain’s response to a particular input,
such as a cognitive stimulus, a contextual setting
or, in the clinical realm, a change in response to an
intervention. For example, functional neuroimaging
has examined the neural impact of peer observation
on teens’ risky decisions and accidents during
simulated driving (Chein, Albert, O’Brien, Uckert,
& Steinberg, 2011) and of a regimen of cognitivebehavioral therapy for depression (Fu et al., 2008).
Findings from functional neuroimaging studies
have great potential to contribute to the diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention of behavioral problems and
psychiatric disorders. The prevention field, however,
has underutilized this knowledge. Researchers
can help overcome this research-to-practice gap
by translating knowledge from neuroscience to
the science and practice of prevention. Brain
science can help generate solutions and provide
a foundation for a non-political, non-rhetoricbased dialog on these problems. To illustrate this,
a brief description is provided on widely used
techniques in functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI)—including resting-state fMRI
(rs-fMRI) and real-time fMRI (rt-fMRI)—and
how they are contributing to translational efforts
in the treatment of neurobehavioral problems. The
potential contributions of fMRI to prevention of
neurobehavioral problems are then summarized.
To highlight the potential of this technology in
prevention research, the use of fMRI by RTI’s
Transdisciplinary Science and Translational
Prevention Program, which focuses on substance
misuse and related problems (e.g., aggression,

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

violence), is reviewed in this paper. Finally, fMRI’s
limitations and ethical issues regarding its use are
discussed in the context of neuroimaging in research
on neurobehavioral disorders.

A Brain With a View: Functional
Neuroimaging
Functional neuroimaging includes a variety of
techniques that examine how the brain is working—
typically, to relate a change in activity in a particular
region with specific task performances, experiences,
or behaviors. Some methods record electrical currents
or magnetic fields as a measure of activity in the brain
areas just underneath the skull. Other techniques,
such as positron emission tomography (PET) and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
examine changes in glucose utilization or blood flow,
from which researchers infer neural activity (Raichle
& Mintun, 2006).
The fMRI technique, which emerged in the early
1990s, offered significant advances over other
methods of studying brain function. For example, the
widely available scanning technique visualizes activity
in all areas of the brain, not just those close to the
surface. Unlike PET, it does not rely on radiation or a
radiolabeled tracer. Without requiring any injection,
it measures altered oxygenation and deoxygenation
of hemoglobin as brain blood flow shifts to activated
regions, a process that takes from 1 to 5 seconds.
An increased local ratio of oxyhemoglobin to
deoxyhemoglobin is a marker of activity, called
blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD), and fMRI
scanners record images of this signal over time
(Logothetis, Pauls, Augath, Trinath, & Oeltermann,
2001; Heeger & Ress, 2002). By applying highpowered computing and statistical analyses,
researchers use the BOLD signal to infer changes in
neuronal activity with high spatial resolution in a
particular brain region (Glover, 2011).
What accounts for the dominance of the fMRI
technique in research to understand the relationship
between mind and body? Both the technical
advantages mentioned above and the successful
blending of brain scanning with relevant behavioral
paradigms play important roles (Raichle, 2009a).
The development of stereotaxic brain atlases for

3

standardization, the capability to average multiple
brain scans, and the development of powerful
statistical analyses have helped enable fMRI to
produce physiological measures relevant to behavior
and mental processes.
Early in its development, fMRI research was
strengthened by the involvement of behavioral
scientists—particularly cognitive psychologists
familiar with tasks that tapped into mental states
(e.g., discriminating stimuli, recognition memory,
and verbal processing). The field was thus founded on
established experimental paradigms. These behavioral
scientists were also familiar with techniques to
control for practice, fluctuating attention, and other
important factors. The technical advantages of
fMRI and well-established behavioral tasks provide
researchers with a unique tool to visualize what is
happening in the brain as participants experience and
respond to a wide range of stimuli or tasks.

Event-Related (Task-Based) fMRI
Scans taken while subjects are engaged in a task
can enable researchers to link the activity of neural
structures with a particular function, experience,
or behavior. Building on behavioral studies,
psychometrics, and other fields—and often working
in interdisciplinary teams—researchers have been
creative in designing fMRI tasks and protocols that
bear on real-world thoughts and behaviors (Spiers &
Maguire, 2007). The imaging technique has provided
new information about uniquely human emotions
(Takahashi et al., 2009) and has had practical
implications regarding typical cognitive function
(Houdé, Rossi, Lubin, & Joliot, 2010; Arsalidou &
Taylor, 2011; Kim, 2011) and responses to people
and social experiences (Dosch, Loenneker, Bucher,
Martin, & Klaver, 2010; Swain, 2008; Chein et al.,
2011; Sebastian et al., 2011).

Resting-State (rs-fMRI)
More recently, the neuroimaging field has recognized
that the brain not only responds to events but is
constantly active—consuming most of its energy at
rest rather than during goal-directed tasks (Raichle,
2010). Communication between interconnected
structures is continuous, although individual circuits

4

RTI Press

Whitten, 2012

may be more or less active at various times. Marcus
Raichle laid the evidentiary groundwork for rsfMRI. He showed that when individuals appear to
be doing nothing—as in, for example, the control
condition of a task-based fMRI experiment in which
participants stare at a mark in the center of a screen—
interconnected brain circuits remain active in
synchronized patterns, which he named the defaultmode network (Raichle et al., 2001; Raichle & Snyder,
2007). This constant communication reflects many
highly coherent functional networks and reveals the
brain’s functional organization (Raichle, 2009b; Deco,
Jirsa, & McIntosh, 2011).
Research on the default-mode network has yielded
insights on brain development. For example, de Bie
and colleagues (2012) found that children aged 5
to 8 have sensory and motor networks with robust,
adult-like functional organization but demonstrate
immature characteristics in circuits related to
higher-order cognitive functions. Similarly, Power
and colleagues (2010) noted that the organizational
characteristics of brain networks are present during
childhood but undergo significant refinement with
maturation. Results from rs-fMRI are complementary
to those from structural neuroimaging—techniques
that visualize the brain’s structures and the fiber tract
connections between them (Damoiseaux & Greicius,
2009)—and critical in advancing the understanding
of neural network development (Supekar et al., 2010).
Studies that apply rs-fMRI to healthy adult
volunteers are helping researchers test hypotheses
about particular functional networks (Taylor,
Seminowicz, & Davis, 2009), sub-networks (Vogel,
Power, Petersen, & Schlaggar, 2010), and the impact
of specific activities (e.g., mindfulness meditation)
on the brain’s intrinsic connectivity (Kilpatrick et
al., 2011). Collaborative efforts to pool rs-fMRI
brain scans into publicly accessible databases help
overcome the problem of small-sample studies. Two
ongoing efforts—the grassroots 1,000 Functional
Connectomes Project (Biswal et al., 2010; http://www.
nih.gov/news/health/jul2009/ninds-15.htm) and a
government-initiated effort, the Human Connectome
Project, which also includes genetic, behavioral,
and structural imaging data, will further increase
knowledge about the brain’s intrinsic connections
(http://www.humanconnectomeproject.org/).

Real-Time (rt-fMRI)
Instantaneous analyses of fMRI data yield a realtime view of neural responses. Combining such
technology with well-established neurofeedback
techniques offers a powerful tool, called real-time
fMRI, to teach people to control their brain activity
(deCharms, 2007). Proponents of rt-fMRI argue that
it can increase a person’s awareness of brain function,
permitting him or her to change their thoughts or
emotions (deCharms, 2008). (Preliminary evidence
from rt-fMRI studies among healthy volunteers is
described in the next section). This tool for teaching
people to control activity in a specific brain region has
therapeutic potential for pain modulation (deCharms
et al., 2005) and perhaps as a component of treatment
for behavioral and emotional problems (deCharms,
2008; Linden & Fallgatter, 2009).

Neuroimaging: A New Driver of
Translational Neuroscience
Since the 1970s, when structural neuroimaging
demonstrated that people with schizophrenia have
enlarged cerebral ventricles, some psychiatrists
have encouraged incorporation of such techniques
into their field (Linden, 2012). With the advent
of biological psychiatry, functional neuroimaging
research on behavioral problems exploded. Although
functional neuroimaging has not yielded clinically
relevant biomarkers for mental disorders, current
studies lay the groundwork for its eventual use in the
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of behavioral
problems and psychiatric disorders (Linden, 2012;
Bigos & Weinberger, 2010; Loth, Carvalho, &
Schumann 2011; Hasler & Northoff, 2011). Powerful
functional neuroimaging tools are helping researchers
understand the origins of mental disorders and
the mechanisms of effective treatments—both
pharmacological and behavioral (Linden, 2012;
Carter et al., 2011).

fMRI as a Tool in the Diagnosis and
Treatment of Neurobehavioral Problems
Of all the neuroimaging techniques, fMRI is thought
to have the greatest potential to change psychiatric
practice. When combined with other techniques,
particularly structural neuroimaging, fMRI can help

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

identify the pathophysiology underlying psychiatric
disorders (Linden & Fallgatter, 2009). Much of this
research compared brain activity patterns of patient
populations with those of healthy controls.
Highly prevalent disorders, including depression,
anxiety, and attention-deficit hyperactivity (Rigucci,
Serafini, Pompili, Kotzalidis, & Tatarelli, 2010;
Robinson & Shergill, 2011; Casey, Ruberry, et al.,
2011; Wilens & Spencer, 2010) are being studied
in this manner. Pediatric psychiatry increasingly
uses fMRI to uncover the development of disorders
(Pavuluri & Sweeney, 2008; Hulvershorn, Cullen, &
Anand, 2011).
Descriptions of the pathology underlying
neurobehavioral disorders based on structural and
functional neuroimaging provide vital, objective
data to improve psychiatric diagnoses. fMRI has the
potential to provide biological indicators of disease,
or biomarkers—critical for diagnosis in other fields
of medicine—to psychiatry, although a great deal of
work remains for this potential to be fully realized
(Malhi & Lagopoulos, 2008; Linden & Fallgatter,
2009). Such neural markers would not replace
symptom-based diagnosis and behavioral assessments
in psychiatry, but they would augment clinical
decision making (Linden & Fallgatter, 2009).

Task-Based fMRI
Using task-based fMRI, researchers have identified
specific differences in brain response between healthy
and psychiatric populations. These differences may
serve as neural markers to identify underlying
pathology and, ultimately, aid diagnosis. The process
of identifying the emotion represented on others’
faces, for example, not only guides how individuals
interact with others but also may serve to gauge the
presence of a mood disorder. To map areas of the
brain involved in this important function, researchers
have applied meta-analysis to many functional
neuroimaging studies investigating how healthy
volunteers process the emotions faces display—for
example, identifying responses to happy, fearful, and
sad faces (Fusar-Poli et al., 2009; Sabatinelli et al.,
2011). Such mapping of the typical neural response
is critical for interpreting aberrant brain activity
observed among patient populations.

5

For example, depressed people who have not
undergone treatment show heightened responses
in the amygdala (a brain structure involved in
fear and anxiety) in response to emotional facial
expressions (Peluso et al., 2009; Fu et al., 2008;
Victor, Furey, Fromm, Ohman, & Drevets, 2010),
although results are not always consistent (Townsend
et al., 2010). With confirmatory research, such
neural responses may ultimately comprise an fMRI
diagnostic for depression. Current diagnostic
methods are characterized by a great deal of overlap
within disorders, and fMRI may contribute to better
specification of disease subtypes (Linden, 2012).
It may be the case that subtypes of disorders are
characterized by different patterns of brain activity
despite similar categorization according to behavioral
diagnostics.
In addition to their potential to improve diagnostic
classification, neural markers may help predict and
track therapeutic responses. Various studies have
found that stronger pre-treatment activity in some
brain areas (particularly the anterior cingulate cortex)
are good predictors of clinical response to cognitivebehavioral therapy (Costafreda, Khanna, MouraoMiranda, & Fu, 2009; Fu et al., 2008) and treatment
for depression (Victor et al., 2010). Such predictors
may help clinicians tailor behavioral treatment
or determine which patients are likely to require
particular combinations of therapies. Investigators
are studying many other task-based brain activity
patterns that may serve as neural signatures to predict
treatment response among people with depression
(Siegle, Carter, & Thase, 2006; Masten et al., 2011;
Forbes et al., 2010; Ritchey, Dolcos, Eddington,
Strauman, & Cabeza, 2011) and other disorders
(Bryant et al., 2008).
By directly assessing improvement in brain functions
with particular relevance to the disorder, psychiatrists
may be able to use task-based fMRI to track progress
in treatment. Indeed, such functional neuroimaging
has shown that behavioral treatments change brain
activity (Beauregard, 2009; Porto et al., 2009; Linden,
2006). Task-based fMRI also has revealed the neural
impact of medications. For example, Rubia and
colleagues (2011) found that boys with attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) showed

6

Whitten, 2012

diminished activity in brain regions involved in
monitoring one’s own performance of a task. A single
dose of methylphenidate normalized this activity.

Resting-State fMRI
Once researchers realized that rs-fMRI can highlight
functionally linked brain regions, they began to
explore the concept that resting-state connectivity
might differ between psychiatric and healthy
populations. As with specific neural markers revealed
by task-based fMRI, scans for functional connectivity
also have the potential to become a biomarker of
disease (Greicius, 2008), and researchers have shown
dysfunction in the default-mode network in several
psychiatric and neurological disorders (for reviews
see Broyd et al., 2009; Zhang & Raichle, 2010).
Among people with depression, for example, brain
networks related to cognitive control, emotion,
and the default-mode showed a greater functional
connectivity to the bilateral dorsal medial prefrontal
cortex region—an area the researchers call the
dorsal nexus (Sheline, Price, Yan, & Mintun,
2010)—than in people who were not depressed.
Heightened connectivity in this area, newly linked
with depression, may explain how the cognitive and
affective symptoms of the disorder co-occur and feed
off each other.
Similarly, functional connectivity studies have
identified some important neural network
communication deficits that researchers may
eventually translate into diagnostic tools and
treatments for neurological disorders (Hampel,
Prvulovic, Teipel, & Bokde, 2011; Yang et al., 2011).
In people with mild cognitive impairment, for
example, connectivity between the hippocampus—a
brain structure central to memory—and cortical
areas of the memory network was diminished and
correlated with cognitive deterioration over a 3-year
period (Wang et al., 2011). The initial rs-fMRI scan
revealed some compensatory increased connectivity
between the hippocampus and other areas of the
brain, but some of this connectivity was lost as the
disease progressed (Wang et al., 2011).
Combining rs-fMRI and structural MRI, these
researchers found that disrupted connectivity in

RTI Press

the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which is part of
multiple neural circuits, was correlated with several
measures of cognitive impairment. Moreover, patterns
of neural deterioration indicated by structural MRI
were generally consistent with rs-fMRI results (Liang,
Wang, Yang, Jia, & Li, 2011). Such results highlight
how rs-fMRI is providing knowledge about the
etiology of brain disorders that will be useful to future
diagnostic and treatment efforts.
As with task-based fMRI, rs-fMRI has the potential
to gauge therapeutic response and predict treatment
outcome. Goveas and colleagues (2011) found that
patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease showed
reduced connectivity in hippocampal neural networks
compared with healthy age-matched controls. After 3
months of treatment with the medication donepezil,
cognitive improvement correlated with enhanced
network connectivity in specific regions—suggesting
that rs-fMRI results may predict response to this
treatment.
A preliminary study by Negishi and colleagues
(2011) found that epilepsy patients who had
recurrent seizures were more likely to have functional
connectivity distributed across the two hemispheres
of the brain. The authors suggested that preoperative
rs-fMRI scans, with particular attention to laterality
of brain activity, might add to well-established
predictors of surgery outcome.
The rs-fMRI technique is helping researchers
better understand other complex behaviors, laying
groundwork for early identification of impairments
and intervention-related improvements. For
example, Koyama and colleagues (2011) used rsfMRI to overcome a long-standing challenge in
reading research. Because rs-fMRI requires no
tasks, it was unnecessary to develop equivalent
tasks across different age groups. The rs-fMRI study
demonstrated that reading competency, both among
children and adults, is associated with stronger
resting-state functional connectivity among motor
regions and language and speech regions. It was also
associated with a shift from the default network to
enhanced activity in brain areas that process visual
representations of words and language sounds
(Koyama et al., 2011).

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

Real-Time Neurofeedback
Currently, most rt-fMRI neurofeedback studies
involve small samples of healthy volunteers.
Investigators identify a local neural area of interest
related to a particular function (e.g., reacting to
positive and negative emotional stimuli) and provide
a means for subjects to monitor their own brain
activity in that region (for example, a thermometer
image, for which “temperatures” reflect strength of
the fMRI signal relative to baseline). Participants
then practice controlling activity in the target area
using their own strategies or one suggested by the
experimenters, alternating with rest periods (Caria et
al., 2012).
With a relatively brief training period (typically,
under 30 minutes), and only when subjects receive
feedback from the target area (rather than from a
non-related comparison region), participants have
controlled activity in brain regions that process pain
(deCharms et al., 2005), emotion (Caria et al., 2010;
Johnston et al, 2010), speech (Rota et al., 2011),
and complex thoughts (McCaig et al., 2011). More
important, voluntary control of local brain activity
alters function and experience—reducing pain
(deCharms et al., 2005), increasing negative ratings
of aversive emotional stimuli (Caria et al., 2010), and
improving identification of the particular emotional
conveyed by tone of speech (Rota et al., 2009; Rota
et al., 2011). Teaching participants to control neural
responses in a localized region is also a non-invasive
means to manipulate brain activity so researchers can
examine the effects on behavior and perhaps draw
causal inferences about function (Caria, Sitaram, &
Birbaumer, 2012).
Advances in the technology, processing, and training
protocols that underlie rt-fMRI neurofeedback are
occurring at a rapid pace. For example, researchers
recently reported a new technique that reduces signal
noise and enhances regional specificity, enabling
them to create movies that reveal brain dynamics
(Magland, Tjoa, & Childress, 2011). Such advances
significantly improve the outlook for translational
applications—including performance enhancement,
rehabilitation, and therapy (Laconte, 2011).

7

Ongoing research in rt-fMRI is highly relevant to
translation in many areas. For example, Yoo and
colleagues (2011) used real-time monitoring of the
parahippocampal cortex—a brain area required to
form memories of scenes—to study learning and
memory. Although in the early stages, such work
may lead to ways to identify when individuals are
most prepared to learn, based on brain responses.
Similarly, other work using this technique is directed
at controlling motor cortex activity, with the aim of
improving rehabilitation regimens after brain injury
(Berman, Horovitz, Venkataraman, & Hallett, 2011).
Some rt-fMRI studies have examined participants’
ability to control emotion areas in the brain, and
this work has particular relevance for therapeutic
applications. For example, Hamilton and colleagues
(2011) focused on the subgenual anterior cingulate
cortex, which is linked with emotion generation;
hyperactivity in this structure is implicated in
depression and other affective disorders. With rtfMRI neurofeedback training, healthy women learned
to dampen activity in this structure (Hamilton,
Glover, Hsu, Johnson, & Gotlib, 2011). Although
these results are preliminary and the study did not
involve a clinical population, the findings raise the
intriguing possibility that neurofeedback could
contribute to behavioral or cognitive therapies for
depression.
Other studies have demonstrated that subjects
receiving rt-fMRI neurofeedback can voluntarily
regulate the insula and amygdala, other brain regions
that are important to emotion (Johnston, Boehm,
Healy, Goebel, & Linden, 2010; Caria et al., 2007).
In a major development in rt-fMRI neurofeedback
research, McCaig and colleagues (2011) recently
demonstrated that healthy volunteers can control
activity of the rostrolateral area of the anterior
prefrontal cortex—a region linked with awareness
of one’s own behavior. The team found that subjects
could learn to control this area, which is critical
to complex functions and seems to monitor and
coordinate thoughts. The demonstration that rtfMRI neurofeedback can help people control areas
that regulate higher-order functions suggests the
technique’s potential in cognitive remediation and
other translational applications.

8

RTI Press

Whitten, 2012

Importance of Integrating fMRI With Other
Approaches
A major strength of neuroscience is its
interdisciplinary nature and its wide range of
experimental methods. Translating neuroscience
research results into practical solutions requires
integration of research approaches. The combination
of fMRI findings with those based on other
techniques is particularly helpful in translational
efforts.

Structural Neuroimaging
As suggested earlier, structural neuroimaging with
MRI is helping to map the extensive system of neural
networks—called the human connectome—in the
healthy brain, the developing brain, the aging brain,
and the diseased brain (Sporns, 2011). Diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) techniques outline the neural
fiber pathways connecting different regions of
the brain and can detect how these change with
maturation, experience, or disease (Johansen-Berg &
Rushworth, 2009; Thomason & Thompson, 2011).

Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Imaging
Hariri (2009) points out that fMRI research provides
complementary information to PET scans, which
use radiolabeled tracers to visualize the activity
of specific neurotransmitter systems. Examples of
this synergy can be found in studies on impulsivity
and the ability to delay of gratification, traits
that vary among individuals from an early age.
Variation within the normal range correlates with
positive adult outcomes—for instance, the ability
to delay gratification at age 4 is associated with
greater competence as an adult (Mischel, Shoda, &
Rodriguez, 1989; Mischel et al., 2011). In the extreme,
impulsivity and problems delaying gratification
increase vulnerability to addictive disorders (Bickel et
al., 2007). Basic neuroscience research indicates that
such individual variation, which is influenced by both
genetics and neurobiology, strongly relates to part of
the brain’s reward pathway called the ventral striatum
(VS). fMRI studies find that strength of activation in
the VS during reward-related tasks correlates with
these characteristics. PET scanning studies have
consistently demonstrated that the neurotransmitter
dopamine modulates such neural responses.

Imaging Genetics
The combination of two powerful tools—genetics and
neuroimaging—offers a significant advancement in
translational research. In this approach, researchers
use fMRI (or some other type of neuroimaging such
as PET) to compare the neural activity of participants
with different genotypes. They usually focus on a
gene known to encode a specific neurochemical,
transporter, enzyme, or receptor (or receptor subunit)
in the brain that prior research has linked to a
behavior. Imaging genetics has yielded insights into
how genes may influence different neurobiological
responses, particularly those that bear on
neurobehavioral disorders, including aggression and
depression. Such studies add value by pointing to
specific mechanisms whereby genes influence brain
function to affect behavior; behavior, in turn, then
alters neurobiology and gene expression (Bigos &
Weinberger, 2010; Loth, Carvalho, & Schumann,
2011).
Genetic studies combined with the neuroimaging
studies mentioned above have identified genetic
variants associated with individual differences
in impulsivity and delay of gratification (Hariri,
2009). Applying those tools to a different problem,
Eisenberger, Way, and colleagues (2007) found that
persons with a genetic variant (the low-expression
allele for the monoamine oxidase-A gene [MAO-A])
previously linked with aggression both reported
more aggressive characteristics and responded
to social exclusion with an exceptionally intense
neural response in the dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex, an area of the brain that processes emotional
experiences.
In other imaging research, investigators found that
heightened amygdala response during the processing
of negative emotional stimuli was exaggerated in
healthy children who carry a genetic variant linked
with depression—the short allele for the serotonin
transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) (Fortier et al., 2010).
Interestingly, Schardt and colleagues (2010) found
that women who carry that allele could reduce
amygdala reactivity to pictures that evoked fear or
disgust through purposefully detaching themselves
from these emotions—a finding that highlights
the malleability of neural responses and power of

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

immediate experience on the brain. Although a great
deal of imaging genetics focuses on brain structures,
researchers are now beginning to examine how
gene expression patterns influence the functional
connectivity of neural networks (Thomason, Yoo,
Glover, & Gotlib, 2009).

Psychophysiological Monitoring
The interaction between brain and body has long
been a subject of inquiry—first in philosophy, then
in psychology, and now in neuroscience. The brainbody connection and its strong relationship with
emotion and health makes this an important issue in
translational neuroscience. Just as the brain influences
what happens in the rest of the body, bodily responses
can convey information about internal states back
to the brain. Therefore, a powerful approach in
translational neuroscience combines fMRI with
the measurement of bodily responses, for example,
skin conductance, heart rate, and levels of the stress
hormone cortisol in saliva. Some researchers have
noted that individuals who are emotionally resilient
are able to reduce stress-related physiological
responses through neural regulation and that
others can improve this ability through training in
mindfulness meditation (Davidson, 2004).
In the study of emotional information processing,
psychophysiological monitoring during affective
or stressful laboratory tasks offers complementary
findings to fMRI (Critchley, 2009). This combination
has shed light on the biological influences of healthpromoting environmental variables, such as social
support and psychosocial resources. For example,
Eisenberger, Taylor, and colleagues (2007) found
that healthy volunteers who regularly interacted
with supportive others had diminished activity in
emotional areas of the brain in response to a stressful
social exclusion task, and the reduced neural activity
was responsible for attenuated cortisol levels.
Similarly, Taylor and colleagues (2008) found that
individuals with psychosocial resources—including
self-esteem, purpose in life, a sense of mastery,
and optimism—responded to threat with smaller
increases in amygdala activity than those with fewer
resources. Lower amygdala activity resulted in lower
cortisol levels among these individuals. Researchers
are now combining rs-fMRI with psychophysiological

9

monitoring to examine how stress reactivity, for
example, alters functionally connected brain networks
(Thomason, Hamilton, & Gotlib, 2011).
By concomitantly using fMRI and other techniques,
researchers are obtaining a fuller picture of the
neurobiology of complex behaviors. Functional
neuroimaging helps describe neurobiological
mechanisms underlying individual differences in
brain circuit function, neurochemical signaling
pathways, and behavioral traits. The findings provide
valuable information about neuropsychiatric
diseases and neurobehavioral disorders. Through
the identification of neural markers of disorder and
descriptions of how they interact with environmental
factors, this research will guide the development of
more effective and individually tailored treatments
and preventive interventions.

Translational Neuroscience and
Prevention: Substance Misuse and
Antisocial Behavior
Most of the translational interest in neuroscience
and functional neuroimaging focuses on diagnosis
and treatment of neurobehavioral disorders rather
than prevention and intervention with individuals
at risk. The current prevention and intervention
paradigm for neurobehavioral problems generally
acknowledges the importance of both biological and
environmental factors—and their interaction. Despite
this recognition, most prevention and intervention
efforts to address substance misuse and antisocial
behavior remain focused on environmental factors
and have not incorporated the rich research findings
from neuroscience.
Decades of neuroscience research indicates that
biology plays an important role in the etiology
of psychiatric and neurobehavioral disorders. As
discussed below, environmental factors often exert an
impact on biology—for example, by shaping neural
circuits during development. Therefore, researchers
have argued that prevention efforts must incorporate
neurobiological methods (Beauchaine et al., 2008;
Fishbein & Tarter, 2009; Cicchetti & Gunnar, 2008;
van Goozen & Fairchild, 2008; Blair & Diamond,
2008).

10

Whitten, 2012

A critical methodological implication is that
randomized trials of prevention interventions must
incorporate biological measures to help identify the
processes underlying vulnerability to neurobehavioral
problems. From such fundamental knowledge,
researchers may determine the mechanisms of
behavior change and determine the extent to which
neural plasticity can be promoted (Beauchaine et al.,
2008; Cicchetti & Gunnar, 2008).
Periods of development characterized by significant
neurobiological changes and plasticity—particularly
the pre-school years and early childhood—present
prime opportunities for intervention because the
brain is optimally responsive to environment and
experience at this time. fMRI techniques may make
it possible to determine how the brain is changed by
preventive interventions.

The Complex Etiology of Substance Misuse
and Antisocial Behavior
Many interacting risk factors increase the likelihood
of substance misuse and antisocial behavior. Genes
indirectly influence behavior through their impact
on the brain’s structure, neurotransmitter levels, and
the functioning of neural circuits (Hariri, 2009; Stiles
& Jernigan, 2010). Environmental factors influence
gene expression, thereby altering the pattern of
protein production (e.g., neurochemicals, receptors,
and enzymes) in the brain. A key line of inquiry
in neuroscience is to determine how inherited and
environmental factors interact over time to shape
the many neural networks that underlie particular
behaviors and neurobehavioral disorders (Stiles,
2011).
Of course, individual- and family-level environmental
factors—including poverty, stress, maltreatment,
witnessing domestic violence, neglect, parent
substance abuse, and prenatal drug exposure—play a
strong role in increasing the risk for substance misuse
and antisocial behavior. Environmental factors can
influence neurobiology by, for example, shaping the
development of neural circuits and neurochemistry
(Lupien, McEwen, Gunnar, & Heim, 2009; Hackman,
Farah, & Meaney, 2010; Gianaros & Manuck, 2010).
The cumulative effect influences neurobehavioral
predispositions (e.g., attention deficit, novelty

RTI Press

seeking) during childhood and adolescence, thereby
shifting the developmental pathway toward a higher
likelihood of problem behaviors.
Prenatal exposure to drugs, including alcohol,
tobacco, and illicit drugs (Salisbury, Ponder,
Padbury, & Lester, 2009), is a common example of
a factor that significantly influences many brain
circuits and increases the propensity for high-risk
neurobehavioral characteristics (e.g., problems with
inhibition and attention, enhanced stress reactivity).
Many individuals who experience prenatal exposure
to drugs also suffer early-life adversity, and Fisher and
colleagues (2011) found that each of these risk factors
has unique negative influences on development.
Prenatal drug exposure predicted problems with
difficulty controlling socially undesirable or
restricted behavior during early childhood and into
adolescence. These difficulties indirectly influenced
problems with executive function (Fisher et al.,
2011). Early adversity independently and directly
predicted difficulties with executive functions—a
critical set of neurocognitive abilities needed to reach
goals including memory, attention, planning, and
inhibiting inappropriate responses. (The importance
of executive functions in risk for behavioral problems
is discussed in more detail below.)
Increased risk for behavior problems results from not
only biologically influenced neural characteristics but
also caregiver relationships—particularly inconsistent
and harsh discipline during early life, lack of warmth,
and low levels of spontaneous teaching behaviors
(Dodge & Pettit, 2003). Researchers are now testing
how growing up with maltreatment or a violent
environment may alter a person’s neurotransmitter
function, stress response, and brain circuits involved
in learning, attention, and emotional regulation
(Loman & Gunnar, 2010). There is support for the
idea that such stress during childhood sensitizes
individuals to subsequent stressors (Andersen &
Teicher, 2009).
The physiological basis for increased sensitivity to
stress may be long-lasting functional and structural
neurobiological changes associated with childhood
maltreatment, particularly reduced volume of the
hippocampus, a brain structure involved in mood
and stress regulation. When researchers statistically

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

controlled for trait anxiety, depression level, age,
intelligence, education, or more recent stressful
life events, the neurobiological characteristics
observed among adults who were maltreated as
children were strikingly similar to those of adults
with depression and posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) (Dannlowski et al., 2012). fMRI indicated
that the extent of maltreatment was associated with
exaggerated activity of the amygdala as participants
viewed threat-related faces. Moreover, structural
neuroimaging revealed that individuals with greater
levels of maltreatment showed less gray matter
volume in the hippocampus, insula, orbitofrontal
cortex, anterior cingulate gyrus, and caudate
(Dannlowski et al., 2012). Some researchers propose
that such neural adaptations may promote survival
in a violent environment but become maladaptive in
other contexts (Mead, Beauchaine, & Shannon, 2010).
Living in a community with concentrated poverty,
violence, low social cohesion, lack of safety, and
physical disorder also increases risk for these
problems and can interact with individual-level
characteristics. For example, maltreatment during
childhood increases the likelihood of later problem
drinking, especially when individuals have grown up
in neighborhoods characterized by physical disorder
and chaos (Keyes et al., 2012). Broader environmental
factors shape neurobiology further and have a
negative effect on individuals’ neurocognitive
function, capacity to respond to stress, and overall
health (Lupien et al., 2009; Hackman & Farah, 2009;
Hackman et al., 2010; Gianaros & Manuck, 2010). If
not buffered by positive factors (e.g., protective genes,
early intervention, warm caregiver relationships, and
competent parenting), the interactive compounding
of negative influences can result in a set of
neurobehavioral characteristics that make substance
misuse and antisocial behavior more likely (Dodge &
Pettit, 2003; Andersen & Teicher, 2009; van Goozen
& Fairchild, 2008; Eisenberg, Spinrad, & Eggum,
2010; Coccaro, Sripada, Yanowitch, & Phan, 2011;
Iacono, Malone, & McGue, 2008; Rubia, 2011). The
next sections describe what fMRI tells us about the
major neurobehavioral characteristics associated with
substance misuse and antisocial behavior, and how
research in this area may inform prevention efforts.

11

Neurobehavioral Characteristics Associated
With Later Substance Misuse and Antisocial
Behavior
Experiencing multiple environmental risk factors
during childhood has a cumulative neurobiological
impact that increases the likelihood that an individual
will experience delays in the development of
executive functions, which are essential to success in
life (Diamond, 2011). The neural building blocks of
executive functioning begin developing early in life
(Morasch & Bell, 2011) and can be detected reliably
by standardized assessments as early as the preschool
years (Davidson, Amso, Anderson, & Diamond,
2006; Wiebe et al., 2011). These abilities are strongly
related to how well individuals perform in school,
both academically and behaviorally (Lan, Legare,
Ponitz, Li, & Morrison, 2011; Hughes & Ensor,
2011). Executive functions begin to emerge during
adolescence but are not fully mature until at least the
mid-20s (Luna, Padmanabhan, & O’Hearn, 2010).
For the purposes of this discussion, this paper will
describe two closely related and often intermingled
aspects of executive functions: (1) self-control, or selfregulation—the ability to delay gratification, control
impulses, direct attention, and inhibit inappropriate
behaviors; and (2) emotional regulation—the ability
to recognize emotional arousal and the behaviors
that stem from it and apply effort to express feelings
appropriately or modify them to achieve a longerterm goal. Self-control is central to healthy and
productive functioning throughout life (Mischel et
al., 1989; Mischel et al., 2011). Self-control varies
widely across individuals; such differences are evident
during childhood and affect adult outcomes. A recent
longitudinal study of more than 1,000 children in
New Zealand found that in adults, poor physical
health, substance dependence, insufficient personal
finances, and criminal offenses all followed a gradient
of self-control—with poor self-regulation during
youth associated with worse adult prospects after
other factors were taken into account (Moffitt et al.,
2011). Although self-control has genetic and neural
underpinnings, environmental factors can increase
or diminish it—suggesting that interventions can
improve this ability (Diamond, Barnett, Thomas, &
Munro, 2007; Blair & Diamond, 2008).

12

Whitten, 2012

Disruption of executive functions characterizes many
mental health, social, and educational problems
(Heatherton & Wagner, 2011; Blair & Diamond,
2008; Diamond, 2011). For example, impairment in
developing executive functions during childhood
is strongly associated with conduct disorder, which
often precedes substance misuse and antisocial
behavior among adults (Dodge & Pettit, 2003;
Ellis, Weiss, & Lochman, 2009; Eisenberg et al.,
2010; Iacono et al., 2008). During adolescence, the
neurobehavioral characteristics of poor executive
function, impulsivity, and problems with emotional
control can manifest in extreme sensation-seeking
(Castellanos-Ryan, Rubia, & Conrod, 2011) and an
increased preference for immediate rewards rather
than long-term benefits (Anokhin, Golosheykin,
Grant, & Heath, 2011). This pattern increases the
likelihood that individuals will make poor decisions—
initiating smoking, drinking, experimenting with
illicit drugs, early sexual behavior, and delinquent
activity—that can derail healthy and productive
developmental pathways (Schepis, Adinoff, & Rao,
2008; Eisenberg et al., 2010; Iacono et al., 2008;
Moffitt et al., 2011; Perry et al., 2011).
Another neurobehavioral characteristic associated
with risk for problem behavior is a hostile
attributional style in which individuals misinterpret
incidents as a threat to personal reputation and
respond with aggression (Dodge, 2006). This
disrupted social-information processing and the
co-occurring development of a dysfunctional
pattern of perceptions and interactions with others
contribute to childhood conduct disorder and
subsequent risk for aggressive and antisocial behavior
(Dodge & Pettit, 2003; Dodge, 2006). Children
at high risk for these problems are hypervigilant
to threat, often misinterpret situations as hostile,
respond with aggression, and show limited skills in
generating competent solutions to social problems.
The likelihood of having this trait is increased by
life experiences—including physical abuse, harsh
parenting, poverty and racism, and peer rejection—as
well as biological predispositions such as impulsivity
and poor executive functioning (Dodge & Pettit,
2003; Ellis et al., 2009).
Dysregulated socio-emotional processing sets up
a situation in which children may be rebuked by

RTI Press

teachers, rejected by peers, and disengaged from
school. Differences among children are often
exaggerated by school systems, and related problems
worsened, by labeling, expectations, and self-fulfilling
prophesies (Dodge & Pettit, 2003).
Interventions that address dysregulated socioemotional processing and teach children alternative
strategies have been shown to be effective at
improving behavioral and academic outcomes
(Powell, Lochman, & Boxmeyer, 2007). Without
intervention, however, behavioral problems typically
continue and worsen when individuals bond with
others who are also aggressive and act out. Deviant
peers and disengagement from school become
particularly important during the transition from
middle school to high school and may push the
developmental pathway further toward adolescent
delinquency and substance misuse (Dodge & Pettit,
2003; Gifford-Smith, Dodge, Dishion, & McCord,
2005; Dodge, 2006; Fishbein & Tarter, 2009).

fMRI Research on Substance Misuse and
Antisocial Behavior, and Implications for
Prevention
Increasingly, the neurobehavioral characteristics
associated with substance misuse and antisocial
disorders are viewed as rooted in dysfunctional
cortico-limbic circuitry. fMRI research indicates
that individuals with these problems demonstrate
disrupted neural interactions between the prefrontal
cortex and subcortical areas of the brain (Bechara,
2005; Sobhani & Bechara, 2011; Coccaro et al.,
2011; Rubia, 2011). Executive functions depend on
these circuits, that is, ones connecting the prefrontal
cortex, the cingulate cortex (particularly the anterior
portion), and the limbic system (Diamond, 2011).
The inferior frontal gyrus area, in particular, has been
linked to several types of self-control and the ability
to inhibit impulses (Tabibnia et al., 2011).
The prefrontal cortex is a relatively large region of
the brain, located behind the forehead, which is
highly interconnected with many other parts of the
brain—including various other cortical regions and
areas below the cortex. Engaging the prefrontal cortex
modulates the activity of limbic regions involved in
emotion, motivation, and monitoring bodily states.
Functioning of the prefrontal cortex underlies key

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

abilities related to behavioral health, including
emotional regulation, delay of gratification in favor
of long-term rewards, and the ability to inhibit
and control behavior (Wager, Davidson, Hughes,
Lindquist, & Ochsner, 2008; Benoit, Gilbert, &
Burgess, 2011; Casey, Somerville et al., 2011).
The monoamine neurotransmitters—including
dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine—are major
players in the functioning of the prefrontal cortex.
The prefrontal cortex and neural networks underlying
executive functions are disrupted by dysfunction
in these neurotransmitters (Posner & Rothbart,
2009; Robbins & Arnsten, 2009). Genes, particularly
ones that encode proteins involved in monoamine
transmission, and environmental factors (e.g.,
parenting quality) are known to shape these neural
networks, providing a physical basis for the ability to
regulate emotions and behavior (Posner & Rothbart,
2009; Robbins & Arnsten, 2009; Diamond, 2011).
Among substance abusers, overactive reward and
impulsive subcortical systems override cognitive
control input from the prefrontal cortex so that drugs
have strong influence on decision making (Bechara,
2005; Diekhof, Falkai, & Gruber, 2008). The risk for
substance misuse among adolescents is also thought
to relate to weaker inhibitory circuits of the prefrontal
cortex and overactive reward systems (Joseph, Liu,
Jiang, Lynam, & Kelly, 2009; Castellanos-Ryan et al.,
2011; Perry et al., 2011). Some have proposed that an
imbalance of activity between the prefrontal cortex
and limbic areas of the brain manifests itself in high
levels of reward seeking and impulsivity, and low
levels of inhibitory control (Schepis et al., 2008; Perry
et al., 2011).
Although disorders characterized by aggression
vary in their neurobiological profiles, fMRI research
suggests that impairments in cortico-limbic circuitry
play a role. Dysfunctional connections between the
orbitofrontal and ventromedial areas of the prefrontal
cortex and the amygdala have been observed in
fMRI studies of adolescents with conduct disorder
and aggression (Stadler, Poustka, & Sterzer, 2010;
Crowe & Blair, 2008). The amygdala is critical for
the formation of associations between stimuli and
outcomes (both positive and negative) and emotional
expression. The orbitofrontal cortex helps process

13

reward and emotion, and plays an important role
in decision making and inhibiting behavior. The
ventromedial cortex, which is also important in
decision making, is involved in encoding associations
with rewards and punishments (Blair, 2008, 2010).
Disruptions in the integrated functioning of these
neural circuits are thought to underlie problems
involving processing of emotional stimuli and social
information, and exerting cognitive control over
affective responses that characterize aggression
and antisocial behavior (Sterzer, Stadler, Krebs,
Kleinschmidt, & Poustka, 2005; Sterzer & Stadler,
2009; Crowe & Blair, 2008; Blair, 2010). For example,
individuals who display aggression that is reactive
and impulsive show hyperactivity in the amygdala
in response to emotionally evocative stimuli along
with impaired functioning in prefrontal regions that
would offset such heightened limbic activity (Blair,
2008, 2010; Rubia, 2011). In contrast, individuals
who display aggression that is purposeful and goaldirected (called instrumental aggression) show
decreased activity in the amygdala and orbitofrontal
cortex in response to emotionally provocative stimuli
or during emotional learning tasks. This latter pattern
of brain activity suggests disruption in the neural
circuits that guide emotional learning and decision
making and may explain why these individuals
respond with aggression rather than pro-social
actions (Crowe & Blair, 2008; Blair, 2010).
The significant role neurobehavioral characteristics
play in the risk for substance misuse and antisocial
behaviors can inform preventive interventions.
Neuroplasticity suggests that there are multiple
opportunities to reduce these problems with available
preventive interventions (Fishbein & Tarter, 2009;
Dodge, 2006; Powell et al., 2007). Dodge and Pettit
(2003) note that there are critical “switchpoints”—that
is, developmental milestones at which intervention
with individuals at risk are particularly helpful—that
offer an “opportunity for re-alignment” (p. 363). If
intervention does not occur during these critical
times, neural connections may become so strong that
associated behavioral problems may not be amenable
to change (Dodge & Pettit, 2003; Dodge, 2006).
A great deal of neuroscience literature indicates that
interventions to boost self-control and executive

14

Whitten, 2012

functioning, particularly during early childhood,
might reduce a wide range of educational and
behavioral problems—including substance misuse
and antisocial behaviors. The need for intervention
is also suggested by the robust observation that early
delays in executive functioning usually become
larger as children grow older—that is, those who
are behind early on usually do not catch up on their
own (Diamond, 2011). During childhood, activities
that exercise executive functions—including play,
physical education, music, and art—improve these
abilities and boost academic results (Diamond et
al., 2007; Diamond, 2011; Diamond & Lee, 2011).
Activities that strengthen the foundations of executive
functions (e.g., inhibitory control, working memory,
and cognitive flexibility) during early childhood help
build the complex ones that emerge later in life (e.g.,
reasoning and problem solving).
Because external factors (e.g., poverty and stress)
have a negative impact on prefrontal cortex
development and executive functions, universal
preventive interventions for families and children
of low socioeconomic status are designed to enrich
the home or school environment. Such interventions
improve the early indicators of executive function
and behavioral outcomes (Eckenrode et al., 2010;
Kitzman et al., 2010; Olds et al., 2010; Olds et al.,
2004; Bierman, Nix, Greenberg, Blair, & Domitrovich,
2008). Researchers who advocate the promotion of
self-control and other executive functions note that
many children enter school without this key ability
(Blair & Diamond, 2008; Diamond et al., 2007).
They argue that teacher training in this important
area and widespread implementation of educational
programs that augment these skills would reduce
behavioral problems and improve academic outcomes
(Blair, 2002; Diamond, 2010). Programs designed to
increase school readiness during early childhood—
for example, Head Start, and an enriched version of
that program that is especially designed to develop
self-regulation and language skills called Head Start
REDI—have demonstrated beneficial effects (Welsh,
Nix, Blair, Bierman, & Nelson, 2010; Bierman,
Domitrovich et al., 2008), including boosting
executive function (Bierman, Nix, et al., 2008).
Efforts to improve these abilities are a major aspect
of early childhood programs designed to avert or

RTI Press

reduce the academic achievement gaps between
low-income children and their better-off peers
(Diamond et al., 2007). Because individuals who start
out with poorer executive functions tend to show
the greatest gains from early childhood programs,
widespread implementation of interventions that
improve self-control among low-income children
could help prevent school failure (Blair & Diamond,
2008). One such intervention, called Tools of the
Mind, strengthens self-regulation and other aspects
of executive function and dramatically improves
academic and behavioral outcomes (Diamond
et al., 2007). A randomized trial of this teacherimplemented pre-school curriculum found that the
intervention significantly reduced behavior problems
among 3- and 4-year-olds compared with children in
control classrooms (Barnett et al., 2008).
Preventive interventions implemented during the
early school years increase children’s awareness and
control of their own behavior also improve their
developmental trajectory. Programs in impoverished
neighborhoods that include teacher training on
managing classroom behavior increase children’s
social competence and emotional self-regulation
and reduce conduct problems relative to those
in comparison schools (Webster-Stratton, Reid,
& Stoolmiller, 2008). One of the most rigorously
studied interventions (the Good Behavior Game)
reduced rates of drug and alcohol use disorders,
regular smoking, and antisocial behaviors into young
adulthood (Kellam et al., 2008). A wide variety of
other interventions—particularly those that involve
repeated practice and a progressively increasing
challenge—also boost development of the neural
networks underlying executive function and improve
self-regulation during childhood (Posner & Rothbart,
2009; Diamond & Lee, 2011).
Although specific exercises do boost executive
function, Diamond and Lee (2011) note that
broader interventions—such as curricula designed
to emphasize emotional, social, and physical
development—may hold the most promise for
improving all these abilities. Indeed, an evidencebased universal intervention, Promoting Alternative
Thinking Strategies (PATHS) Curriculum, that
promotes social and emotional skills—including
inhibition of impulsive behavior, awareness and

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

regulation of feelings, accurate perception of the
perspectives of others, correct identification of
problems, and development of positive solutions and
goals—improves verbal fluency and self-regulation
(Riggs, Greenberg, Kusché, & Pentz, 2006). This
teacher-led intervention helps children handle social
tasks appropriate to their ages without aggression or
other behavioral problems.
To counter adolescent risk for behavioral problems,
some have suggested exercises that strengthen the
inhibitory circuit between the prefrontal cortex,
anterior cingulate cortex, and limbic regions (Perry et
al., 2011). Studies with healthy young adults suggest
that relatively short-term training in meditation
improved attention, boosted mood, and decreased
stress (Tang et al., 2007). Interventions that direct
individuals to exert effortful control of negative
emotions may also hold promise for bolstering the
inhibitory circuit (Drabant, McRae, Manuck, Hariri,
& Gross, 2009). Developing the ability to imagine
distant outcomes and desires in detail seems to orient
healthy adults toward future-minded choices (Peters
& Büchel, 2010; Benoit et al., 2011), and prevention
specialists might be able to apply this information to
boost functioning among teens at risk for behavioral
problems. Although much more research is needed
in this area, a combination of behavioral research on
exercises that improve inhibition and fMRI may lay
the groundwork for the development and refinement
of preventive interventions for adolescents.

Integrating fMRI into Prevention
Research
As described previously, fMRI has great potential
to improve the diagnosis and treatment of
neurobehavioral disorders. Transdisciplinary teams
including prevention researchers and neuroimaging
specialists could engage in parallel efforts, with fMRI
technology, to help prevent substance misuse and
antisocial behavior. Although scientists are starting
to use information on the neurobehavioral correlates
of substance misuse and anti-social behavior to guide
preventive interventions, such translational research
is in its early stages. Perhaps infusing neuroscience
will spur advancement and innovation (Fishbein,
2011).

15

For example, fMRI might provide valuable insights
into why some individuals do not respond to some
preventive interventions (such as those implemented
in schools), laying the groundwork for programs
that are tailored at the subgroup level (e.g., sensation
seekers). Additionally, fMRI might point to the “active
ingredient” in prevention programs and determine
whether interventions designed to improve executive
functions alter brain activity. Longitudinal studies
might compare executive function and underlying
neural activity in individuals who have participated
in interventions that focus on developing self-control,
attention, concentration, and problem solving (e.g.,
Tools of the Mind, and the PATHS Curriculum) with
that of those in control groups.
The fMRI technique may also help improve
prevention interventions and public health campaigns
distributed via mass media. For example, fMRI can
help elucidate the neural impact of public service
announcements about substance misuse among
smokers (Langleben et al., 2009). Findings from a
recent neuroimaging study suggest that fMRI results
may predict population responses to televised public
service announcements. Among a group of heavy
smokers with a strong intention to quit who viewed
cessation ads, activity of the medial prefrontal
cortex—but not self-reported perceptions—predicted
pre-post campaign changes in the call volume activity
of the advertised quit line. Although preliminary,
the results raise the intriguing possibility that neural
focus groups could test and improve public service
announcements (Falk, Berkman, & Lieberman, 2012).
As noted previously, the rt-fMRI technique can
serve as a therapeutic tool to strengthen brain
activity in a particular region. Perry and colleagues
(2011) suggest that this tool might be used to boost
inhibitory control among youth at risk for substance
misuse (those with a high degree of impulsive,
sensation-seeking traits). A recent study found
that people with schizophrenia can use rt-fMRI
feedback training to regulate the activity of a specific
brain region (the anterior insula cortex), which is
associated with changes in emotion perception (Ruiz
et al., 2011). This finding—the first with a patient
population—supports the incorporation of rt-fMRI
into therapeutic interventions.

16

RTI Press

Whitten, 2012

RTI International’s Transdisciplinary Science
and Translational Prevention Program
In support of RTI International’s mission to improve
the human condition by turning knowledge
into practice, the Transdisciplinary Science and
Translational Prevention Program applies the
latest research advances to the complex problem
of drug abuse. The program integrates researchers
and facilities across RTI International to conduct
research in neurobiology, physiology, environmental
science, and human mental and behavioral health.
This transdisciplinary and translational approach
allows the program to better define what factors
and associated personality traits make people more
susceptible to drug abuse, as well as the factors
that protect against these problems (personal
communication D. Fishbein, RTI International,
October 26, 2010).
With this knowledge, program researchers strive to
develop medical, psychosocial, and public health
interventions and policies that are rooted in basic
research, with the ultimate goal of promoting
personalized and preventive medicine. They aim to
determine the preventive interventions that work best
for particular groups, why they work, and under what
circumstances such measures are effective. This goal
encompasses many research components—including
the identification of the underlying pathophysiology
of mental and behavioral disorders, mechanisms
underlying intervention responsiveness, the extent
to which factors associated with vulnerability
are modifiable, and how interventions work. The
program informs the development of novel, targeted,
preventive interventions and policies regarding drug
abuse and other risk behaviors.
At the Baltimore facility of RTI’s Transdisciplinary
Science and Translational Prevention Program,
Diana Fishbein, PhD, and her colleagues are using
neuroimaging techniques, neurocognitive tests, and
other measures to advance these research goals.
Of primary interest is the use of fMRI to measure
the effect of prevention programs on the brain.
In particular, the researchers are examining the
effects of intervention on developmental pathways
by comparing individuals who were exposed to

intervention with those who were not exposed
(personal communication with D. Eldreth, RTI
International, July 7, 2011).
For example, they are using fMRI to determine how
neural functioning, along with neurocognitive factors,
moderate different behavioral responses among
individuals who have participated in the PATHS
Curriculum and those who have not. They hope to
make a similar comparison between participants
in the Good Behavior Game and those in control
schools. By neuroimaging participants and controls
who are now in their early 20s, the RTI team aims
to document neural changes that may underlie the
benefits of this intervention. The scientists also will
compare individuals who are doing well behaviorally
with those who are not (personal communication
with D. Fishbein and D. Eldreth, RTI International,
August 17, 2011). The team is also examining
participants’ level of neurocognitive functioning and
whether those who show changes in these functions
also show corresponding changes in academic and
behavioral outcomes.
Based on what scientists know about the
neurobiology of substance misuse and the intended
impact of prevention programs to improve emotional
regulation and self-control, the RTI researchers have
hypothesized that areas of the brain that underlie
executive functioning will show greater maturation
among intervention participants. Fishbein and
colleagues are focusing on the activity of neural areas
known from prior research to underlie performance
of the neurocognitive tasks being used by the RTI
team. The long-term goal is to determine whether
preventive intervention promotes cognitive and
emotional regulation of neural processes and, if so,
whether these developments occur in tandem with
improved skills.
Although powerful fMRI techniques hold promise
when applied to prevention science and practice,
their expense (see the ubsequent section on fMRI
limitations) and lack of portability constrain their use
in prevention efforts. One way around this limitation
is to use fMRI in foundational research to identify
tasks, both emotion-regulatory and cognitive, that
consistently recruit relevant brain areas. With that
knowledge, scientists can then use those tasks to

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

measure specific functions as warranted, without
imaging, as a low-cost, easy-to-administer test battery
reflective of underlying mechanisms of interest.
A variety of assessments—including working
memory tests, tests of the ability to pay attention and
inhibit strong tendencies, and cognitive-affective
shifting tasks—all engage the prefrontal cortex and
may be useful measures of vulnerability (personal
communication with D. Eldreth, RTI International,
July 7, 2011). Once researchers identify particular
neural signatures of non-invasive tests, these
measures would provide more information about
brain function than those currently in use. A wide
range of professionals could administer these tasks in
almost any setting (personal communication with D.
Fishbein, RTI International, August 17, 2011).
Neuroimaging studies also indicate that the context
in which individuals perform tasks influences the
underlying brain activity. Tasks involving challenges,
choices, and decisions seem to require a social context
to fully engage the brain. This suggests that simulation
tasks and those that integrate virtual reality would be
more readily transferable to preventive applications
than two-dimensional computer tasks (personal
communication with D. Fishbein, RTI International,
August 17, 2011).
The formative research to bridge brain scans,
neurobehavioral tasks, and prevention could yield
many advances, such as tasks that are useful in
diagnosis, improved means to monitor changes
during treatment to determine how well a therapy
works, and an enhanced understanding of the
etiology of disorders. Some of the tasks that increase
progressively in complexity and difficulty could serve
as part of preventive intervention by strengthening
brain areas involved in important functions, such as
the inhibition of impulses (personal communication
with D. Fishbein, RTI International, August 17, 2011).
Similarly, information on brain-task relationships
from rt-fMRI studies could help scientists select
activities to be included in interventions (personal
communication with D. Eldreth, RTI International,
July 7, 2011).

17

fMRI Limitations and Neuroethics
The power of fMRI technologies and their
tremendous potential to inform translational
neuroscience has engendered great enthusiasm.
However, any review of such techniques must note
their limitations. Moreover, the strong interest
in neuroimaging among psychiatrists and other
behavioral scientists whose work influences the
treatment of people with mental disorders requires
some discussion of ethical issues.
As with all scientific techniques, fMRI has limitations
that researchers must be aware of as they interpret
results. Although some argue that attempts to localize
psychological function via functional neuroimaging
are misguided (Miller, 2010), a more widely accepted
caveat about fMRI is that correlations of brain activity
patterns with behavior does not prove causality
(Cacioppo et al., 2003; Beck, 2010). A structure’s
activity during a task does not necessarily mean it
is generating the observed behavior or mental state.
Similarly, the absence of activity in another brain
region does not imply its lack of involvement in the
function. Moreover, knowing whether the BOLD
signal from a particular brain area is correlated with a
task does not explain the mental state or behavior.
Links between behavior and a particular brain
region revealed through fMRI, however, can guide
researchers as they explore the function of the
area using other methods that permit inferences
about causality. Researchers must also correct for
multiple comparisons in fMRI analyses, which yield
a relatively high false positive rate and may lead to
spurious associations (Beck, 2010). Well-designed
studies in which researchers measure changes in
behavior as participants control local neural activity
via rt-fMRI may come closer to supporting causal
inferences about brain function and behavior (Caria
et al., 2012).
A key element of proper interpretation of fMRI
is the presence of an appropriate and meaningful
comparison; BOLD signals during a task must be
contrasted with those from a baseline or control
condition (Cacioppo et al., 2003). Moreover, as the rsfMRI studies indicate, baseline conditions in imaging
studies (such as looking at a hash mark in the middle

18

Whitten, 2012

of a screen) do not translate into an absence of brain
activity. Nevertheless, the interdisciplinary nature
of neuroscience bolsters confidence in fMRI results
and working hypotheses. Neuroimaging researchers
who work with colleagues from complementary fields
are better able to get a bearing on meaningful brainbehavior relationships and avoid oversimplification of
complex functions (Decety & Cacioppo, 2010).
Interdisciplinary teams have brought a new approach
to fMRI that may help home in on causal brainbehavior relationships. Some fMRI researchers
are using mediational analyses, an approach from
epidemiological research, to examine multiple
correlations (Eisenberger, Taylor, et al., 2007; Kober
et al., 2010; Ide & Li, 2011). Such analyses help
identify causal relationships between particular brain
areas and behavioral results, but full explanations
still require the convergent findings from multiple
methods.
Additionally, different types of experimental designs
are expanding the inferences that can be derived from
fMRI data. Traditionally, activity of a particular brain
region is the dependent variable in fMRI studies. In
a new approach, researchers measure task-related
neural activity as a dependent variable during the
laboratory phase of a study and then use it as an
independent variable to predict behavior during a
follow-up period. For example, neural responses to
two types of smoking-cessation communications—
messages tailored to the individual (Chua et al., 2011)
and television advertisements from public health
organizations (Falk, Berkman, Whalen, & Lieberman,
2011), respectively—predicted observers’ success in
quitting in the short term. Similarly, Berkman and
colleagues (2011) combined fMRI and measurement
of cigarette craving via text messaging to demonstrate
that enhanced activity on a task that requires
inhibitory control predicted better control over the
desire to smoke during a quit attempt. The stronger
research design of such studies improves confidence
in the use of fMRI as a tool for practical applications
(e.g., testing and improving health messages) and for
suggesting neural mechanisms that underlie changing
a health-related behavior.
The relatively small number of subjects in functional
neuroimaging studies and the use of various protocols

RTI Press

among investigations of the same behavior limit the
generalization of fMRI results. Wager and colleagues
(2009), however, argue that meta-analysis—
examining the findings of many studies in a particular
area of inquiry—can help evaluate the consistency
and specificity of neural correlates linked with
various behaviors and cognitive processes. Moreover,
advanced analytical techniques can contribute
to functional mapping by identifying distributed
networks of brain structures that work together from
patterns of co-activation. For example, investigators
have used meta-analysis to clarify the neural
underpinnings of cognitive functions (Arsalidou &
Taylor, 2011; Kim, 2011).
Rapid advancements in neuroscience, the persuasive
power of neuroimaging technology among the public,
and the inherent limitations of the technique naturally
present ethical issues. Neuroethics encompasses a
range of ethical considerations and concerns about
all types of brain research (Cheung, 2009; Illes &
Bird, 2006). The use of neurotechnologies, including
fMRI, in psychiatry presents particularly complex
ethical issues relevant to discussion of functional
neuroimaging for translational purposes (Walter,
Berger, & Schnell, 2009). Psychiatry, in particular, has
always involved ethical issues because of uncertain
diagnoses, the stigma surrounding behavioral
problems, skepticism about treatments, and concerns
about therapy as an attempt to change the way people
feel, think, and behave. Cheung’s (2009) review
points out a core issue: How should psychiatrists
use the vastly expanded knowledge about the
brain? Although many psychiatric researchers have
embraced neuroimaging, they view the use of fMRI
to make clinical decisions in this field as “a distant
proposition” (Cheung, 2009 p. 395).
At this time, fMRI advocates mainly see the
technique’s potential to contribute much needed
objective, biological information to the diagnostic
process in psychiatry. However, fMRI does not
pinpoint the source of pathology but rather
provides neural correlates. Because atypical activity
patterns in a brain scan do not imply illness in the
absence of symptoms, brain scans would not be
the sole diagnostic in psychiatry (Cheung, 2009).
Furthermore, group differences between reference
and patient populations may not apply to individuals

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

(Walter et al., 2009). Any biological assay to predict
disease and clinical outcomes must be used and
interpreted cautiously, and the results communicated
carefully with appropriate caveats and attention to
confidentiality (Illes & Bird, 2006).
However, fMRI may eventually support the
validity of subjective diagnostic assessments and
focused clinical descriptions of disorder subtypes.
A biological explanation of symptoms does not
necessarily ease the negative perceptions conveyed
by psychiatric diagnoses and the associated stigma,
self-stigma, and self-fulfilling prophesies (Cheung,
2009). Although the use neuroimaging genetics
may improve diagnostic capabilities in psychiatry,
the ethical issues—including stigma, potential for
discrimination, privacy, and commercialization—
are magnified with this combination of powerful
technologies (Tairyan & Illes, 2009). As just one
part of diagnosis, the expense of brain scans and
access to the technology for disadvantaged people
raise concerns (Cheung, 2009; Illes & Raffin, 2005).
In cases where people with psychiatric illnesses
have committed crimes, brain imaging raises a
challenging set of questions about the nature of selfdetermination, free will, and legal responsibility for
actions (Cheung, 2009; Illes & Bird, 2006).
The ethical issues of fMRI as a diagnostic tool for
neurobehavioral problems are amplified in the
context of child psychiatry (Illes & Raffin, 2005),
where informed consent and the ability of the
patient to make treatment decisions are of particular
concern. Some express apprehension that scans might
result in labeling, mislabeling, and self-fulfilling
prophesies that change an individual’s life course.
Neuroethicists also note that fMRI diagnostics may
be eventually used to judge children’s propensity
for behaviors rather than assess problems that have
already emerged (Illes & Raffin, 2005), which may put
them at risk for inappropriate interventions (Fenton,
Meynell, & Baylis, 2009).
A major concern is that brain scans in child
psychiatry (e.g., as an aid in diagnosis) may lead to
their use to make decisions regarding children in
other arenas—for example, educational systems and
courts (Fenton et al., 2009). Some have expressed
apprehension that schools might one day coerce

19

students to get fMRI scans for placement in abilityrelated streams, for example (Illes & Raffin, 2005).
Courts might use brain scans to decide whether youth
are competent to stand trial as adults or receive adult
punishments (Fenton et al., 2009). Neuroethicists
point out that the state already has tremendous power
over the lives of children in the education and court
systems, and they call for extreme caution regarding
fMRI’s potential influence on the complicated
decisions regarding the welfare of children.
If fMRI plays a role in the treatment of
neurobehavioral problems, Walter and colleagues
(2009) have concerns that brain scans may result
in a focus on pathological mechanisms rather than
rather than understanding the person. Another
worrisome possibility is “treating the scan” (Cheung,
2009 p. 395)—intervening in a way that changes
fMRI-measured brain activity rather than addressing
the environmental or behavioral factors related to
patients’ problems. Mismatches between brain scans,
symptoms, and clinical improvement would present
a host of vexing questions for psychiatrists (Cheung,
2009).
Neuroethicists also point out that any therapeutic
advances from fMRI and other technologies might
lead to attempts to enhance normal function among
those who can afford it, further exacerbating social
inequalities (Racine & Illes, 2006; Cheung, 2009).
They note that pharmaceuticals prescribed for those
with neurobehavioral disorders (e.g., attention deficit,
Alzheimer’s, and depression) have been obtained by
healthy people for the purposes of life enhancement
(e.g., exam preparation, improving memory, and
mood elevation), akin to plastic surgery. As Illes
and Raffin (2005) suggest, direct-to-consumer
advertising and the current absence of regulation for
neuroimaging may facilitate use of brain scans and
therapeutic interventions among already advantaged
people seeking a neurological competitive edge.

Future Applications and Conclusions
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is
a powerful, non-invasive tool that visualizes brain
activity. The related techniques of event-related (taskbased) fMRI, resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI), and realtime fMRI (rt-fMRI) are widely used in research. This

20

Whitten, 2012

important subfield of translational neuroscience—
particularly when combined with other approaches—
is contributing to the diagnosis and treatment of
neurobehavioral problems and psychiatric disorders.
In one important area of translational research,
the development of biomarkers for diagnosis and
prognosis, scientists are integrating fMRI findings
with new technological approaches. The most
promising new approaches, driven by advances
in molecular biology and bioinformatics, come
from fields where scientists are mapping the entire
complement of an important biological entity—
including genes (genomics), proteins (proteomics),
or metabolites (metabalomics). These studies attempt
to integrate all that is known about the biology of
an entire system, including how all the components
interact with each other and the environment to
determine health and disease (Petrella et al., 2008).
Although identifying the totality of these biological
entities requires substantial groundwork, the payoff
in terms of understanding individual vulnerability to
diseases is expected to be enormous.
The “-omics” findings can greatly expand the amount
of information obtained from simple, noninvasive
laboratory tests. Blood, urine, and saliva samples
collected today are only analyzed for a small fraction
of the biochemicals present (Quinones & KaddurahDaouk, 2009). Once scientists identify and validate
the patterns of genes, proteins, and metabolites
associated with particular diseases, then samples can
be tested for unique profiles to aid early diagnosis.
These -omics-based diagnostic markers may prove
to be more efficient and cost-effective than current
techniques, and researchers plan to incorporate them
into the development of medications and behavioral
interventions (Filiou & Turck, 2011: Linden, 2012).
Current “-omics” research is laying the foundation
for future biomarkers. Researchers are mapping
these potential biomarkers among various patient
populations, including those with psychiatric and
neurological diseases (Quinones & Kaddurah-Daouk,
2009). For example, researchers are developing both
proteomic (Lista, Faltraco, & Hampel, 2012) and
metabalomic (Kaddurah-Daouk et al., 2011) profiles
of Alzheimer’s disease.

RTI Press

Characterization of the entire human DNA sequence
has major implications for scientific understanding
of the brain and neurobehavioral disorders. Almost
two-thirds of the approximately 30,000 genes in the
human genome are associated with brain function
(Petrella, Mattay, & Doraiswamy, 2008). These
genes encode for neurotransmitters, enzymes,
neural growth factors, and other nervous system
components.
Given the complexity of neurobehavioral disorders,
a large panel of biomarkers will undoubtedly be
necessary for accurate diagnostic and prognostic use
in psychiatry. Filiou and Turck (2011) point out the
importance of integrating “-omics” and neuroimaging
data in efforts to characterize psychiatric diseases and
develop differential diagnosis in psychiatry (Linden
& Thome, 2011; Thompson, Martin, & Wright, 2010;
Wiedemann, 2011). By combining biomarkers—such
as altered protein levels, brain activity patterns, and
genetic information—scientists expect to connect
molecular profiles with neural functioning and
performance on particular behavioral and cognitive
tasks. For example, “-omics” may reveal molecular
and biochemical patterns underlying problems
with stress regulation; the understanding of anxiety
disorders may require that researchers connect this
information with fMRI data showing responses to
threatening stimuli. With a combination of these
powerful approaches, scientists expect to map the
biological pathways from genes to brain circuits
and networks and then to cognitive and behavioral
characteristics related to specific disorders.
Historically, the prevention field has incorporated
neither the principles of neuroscience nor its
methods, including fMRI. Gradually, this is changing;
some innovative prevention researchers are starting
to translate knowledge about the neurobiology
underlying behavior problems, discovered through
the use of fMRI techniques, with the hope of
improving interventions. Substance misuse and
antisocial behavior, for example, are associated with
particular neurobehavioral characteristics, which
suggest specific areas for intervention. Researchers
at RTI’s Transdisciplinary Science and Translational
Prevention Program are ahead of the curve, having
already begun to integrate fMRI technology into
several of their studies.

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

21

References
Andersen, S.L., & Teicher, M.H. (2009). Desperately
driven and no brakes: Developmental stress
exposure and subsequent risk for substance
abuse. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,
33(4), 516–524.

Berman, B.D., Horovitz, S.G., Venkataraman, G., &
Hallett, M. (2011). Self-modulation of primary
motor cortex activity with motor and motor
imagery tasks using real-time fMRI-based
neurofeedback. Neuroimage, 59(2), 917–925.

Anokhin, A.P., Golosheykin, S., Grant, J.D., & Heath,
A.C. (2011). Heritability of delay discounting in
adolescence: A longitudinal twin study. Behavior
Genetics, 41(2), 175–183.

Bickel, W.K., Miller, M.L., Yi, R., Kowal, B.P.,
Lindquist, D.M., & Pitcock, J.A. (2007).
Behavioral and neuroeconomics of drug
addiction: Competing neural systems and
temporal discounting processes. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 90 (Suppl 1), S85–S91.

Arsalidou, M., & Taylor, M.J. (2011). Is 2+2=4? Metaanalyses of brain areas needed for numbers and
calculations. Neuroimage, 54(3), 2382–2393.
Barnett, W.S., Jung, K., Yarosz, D.J., Thomas, J.,
Hornbeck, A., Stechuk, R., & Burns, S. (2008).
Educational effects of the Tools of the Mind
curriculum: A randomized trial. Early Childhood
Research Quarterly, 23, 299–313.
Beauchaine, T.P., Neuhaus, E., Brenner, S.L., &
Gatzke-Kopp, L. (2008). Ten good reasons to
consider biological processes in prevention
and intervention research. Development and
Psychopathology, 20(3), 745–774.
Beauregard, M. (2009). Effect of mind on brain
activity: Evidence from neuroimaging studies of
psychotherapy and placebo effect. Nordic Journal
of Psychiatry, 63(1), 5–16.
Bechara, A. (2005). Decision making, impulse
control and loss of willpower to resist drugs: A
neurocognitive perspective. Nature Neuroscience,
8(11), 1458–1463.
Beck, D.M. (2010). The appeal of the brain in the
popular press. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 5, 762–766.
Benoit, R.G., Gilbert, S.J., & Burgess, P.W. (2011).
A neural mechanism mediating the impact of
episodic prospection on farsighted decisions.
Journal of Neuroscience 31(18), 6771–6779.
Berkman, E.T., Falk, E.B., & Lieberman, M.D. (2011).
In the trenches of real-world self-control: Neural
correlates of breaking the link between craving
and smoking. Psychological Science, 22(4),
498–506.

Bierman, K.L., Domitrovich, C.E., Nix, R.L., Gest,
S.D., Welsh, J.A., Greenberg, M.T., . . . Gill, S.
(2008). Promoting academic and social-emotional
school readiness: The Head Start REDI program.
Child Development, 79(6), 1802–1817.
Bierman, K.L., Nix, R.L., Greenberg, M.T., Blair, C.,
& Domitrovich, C.E. (2008). Executive functions
and school readiness intervention: Impact,
moderation, and mediation in the Head Start
REDI program. Development and Psychopathology,
20(3), 821–843.
Bigos, K.L., & Weinberger, D.R. (2010). Imaging
genetics—days of future past. Neuroimage, 53(3),
804–809.
Biswal, B.B., Mennes, M., Zuo, X.N., Gohel, S., Kelly,
C., Smith, S.M., . . . Milham, M.P. (2010). Toward
discovery science of human brain function.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
107(10), 4734–4739.
Blair, C. (2002). School readiness: Integrating
cognition and emotion in a neurobiological
conceptualization of children’s functioning
at school entry. American Psychologist, 57(2),
111–127.
Blair, C., & Diamond, A. (2008). Biological processes
in prevention and intervention: The promotion
of self-regulation as a means of preventing school
failure. Development and Psychopathology, 20(3),
899–911.

22

Whitten, 2012

Blair, R.J. (2008). The amygdala and ventromedial
prefrontal cortex: Functional contributions
and dysfunction in psychopathy. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series
B, Biological Sciences, 363(1503), 2557–2565.
Blair, R.J. (2010). Neuroimaging of psychopathy and
antisocial behavior: A targeted review. Current
Psychiatry Reports, 12(1), 76–82.
Broyd, S.J., Demanuele, C., Debener, S., Helps, S.K.,
James, C.J., & Sonuga-Barke, E.J. (2009). Defaultmode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: A
systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 33(3), 279–296.
Bryant, R.A., Felmingham, K., Kemp, A., Das, P.,
Hughes, G., Peduto, A., & Williams, L. (2008).
Amygdala and ventral anterior cingulate
activation predicts treatment response to
cognitive behaviour therapy for post-traumatic
stress disorder. Psychological Medicine, 38(4),
555–561.
Cacioppo, J.T., Berntson, G.G., Lorig, T.S., Norris,
C.J., Rickett, E., & Nusbaum, H. (2003). Just
because you’re imaging the brain doesn’t mean
you can stop using your head: A primer and set of
first principles. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85(4), 650–661.
Caria, A., Sitaram, R., & Birbaumer, N. (2012).
Real-time fMRI: A tool for local brain regulation.
Neuroscientist, 18(5), 487–501.
Caria, A., Sitaram, R., Veit, R., Begliomini, C., &
Birbaumer, N. (2010). Volitional control of
anterior insula activity modulates the response to
aversive stimuli. A real-time functional magnetic
resonance imaging study. Biological Psychiatry,
68(5), 425–432.
Caria, A., Veit, R., Sitaram, R., Lotze, M., Weiskopf,
N., Grodd, W., & Birbaumer, N. (2007).
Regulation of anterior insular cortex activity using
real-time fMRI. Neuroimage, 35(3), 1238–1246.

RTI Press

Carter, C.S., Barch D.M., Bullmore, E., Breiling, J.,
Buchanan, R.W., Butler, P., . . . Wykes, T. (2011).
Cognitive Neuroscience Treatment Research
to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia II:
Developing imaging biomarkers to enhance
treatment development for schizophrenia and
related disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 70(1), 7–12.
Casey, B.J., Ruberry, E.J., Libby, V., Glatt, C.E., Hare, T.,
Soliman, F., . . . Tottenham, N. (2011). Transitional
and translational studies of risk for anxiety.
Depression and Anxiety, 28(1), 18–28.
Casey, B.J., Somerville, L.H., Gotlib, I.H., Ayduk,
O., Franklin, N.T., Askren, M.K., . . . Shoda,
Y. (2011). Behavioral and neural correlates of
delay of gratification 40 years later. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(36),
14998–15003.
Castellanos-Ryan, N., Rubia, K., & Conrod, P.J. (2011).
Response inhibition and reward response bias
mediate the predictive relationships between
impulsivity and sensation seeking and common
and unique variance in conduct disorder and
substance misuse. Alcoholism, Clinical and
Experimental Research, 35(1), 140–155.
Chein, J., Albert, D., O’Brien, L., Uckert, K., &
Steinberg, L. (2011). Peers increase adolescent risk
taking by enhancing activity in the brain’s reward
circuitry. Developmental Science, 14(2), F1–F10.
Cheung, E.H. (2009). A new ethics of psychiatry:
Neuroethics, neuroscience, and technology.
Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 15(5), 391–401.
Chua, H.F., Ho, S.S., Jasinska, A.J., Polk, T.A.,
Welsh, R.C., Liberzon, I., & Strecher, V.J. (2011).
Self-related neural response to tailored smokingcessation messages predicts quitting. Nature
Neuroscience, 14(4):426–427.
Cicchetti, D., & Gunnar, M.R. (2008). Integrating
biological measures into the design and evaluation
of preventive interventions. Development and
Psychopathology, 20(3), 737–743.
Coccaro, E.F., Sripada, C.S., Yanowitch, R.N., &
Phan, K.L. (2011). Corticolimbic function
in impulsive aggressive behavior. Biological
Psychiatry, 69(12), 1153–1159.

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

Costafreda, S.G., Khanna, A., Mourao-Miranda, J.,
& Fu, C.H. (2009). Neural correlates of sad faces
predict clinical remission to cognitive behavioural
therapy in depression. NeuroReport, 20(7),
637–641.
Critchley, H.D. (2009). Psychophysiology of neural,
cognitive and affective integration: fMRI and
autonomic indicants. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 73(2), 88–94.
Crowe, S.L., & Blair, R.J. (2008). The development
of antisocial behavior: What can we learn from
functional neuroimaging studies? Development
and Psychopathology, 20(4), 1145–1159.
Damoiseaux, J.S., & Greicius, M.D. (2009). Greater
than the sum of its parts: A review of studies
combining structural connectivity and restingstate functional connectivity. Brain Structure and
Function, 213(6), 525–533.
Dannlowski, U., Stuhrmann, A., Beutelmann, V.,
Zwanzger, P., Lenzen, T., Grotegerd, D., . . . Kugel,
H. (2012). Limbic scars: Long-term consequences
of childhood maltreatment revealed by functional
and structural magnetic resonance imaging.
Biological Psychiatry, 71(4), 286–293.
Davidson, M.C., Amso, D., Anderson, L.C., &
Diamond, A. (2006). Development of cognitive
control and executive functions from 4 to 13
years: Evidence from manipulations of memory,
inhibition, and task switching. Neuropsychologia,
44(11), 2037–2078.
Davidson, R.J. (2004). Well-being and affective style:
Neural substrates and biobehavioural correlates.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Series B, Biological Sciences, 359(1449),
1395–1411.
de Bie, H.M., Boersma, M., Adriaanse, S., Veltman, D.J.,
Wink, A.M., Roosendaal, S.D., . . . Sanz-Arigita,
E.J. (2012). Resting-state networks in awake fiveto eight-year-old children. Human Brain Mapping,
33(5), 1189–1201.
Decety, J., & Cacioppo, J. (2010). Frontiers in human
neuroscience: The golden triangle and beyond.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 767–771.

23

deCharms, R.C. (2007). Reading and controlling
human brain activation using real-time functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11(11), 473–481.
deCharms, R.C. (2008). Applications of real-time
fMRI. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(9),
720–729.
deCharms, R.C., Maeda, F., Glover, G.H., Ludlow, D.,
Pauly, J.M., Soneji, D., . . . Mackey, S.C. (2005).
Control over brain activation and pain learned
by using real-time functional MRI. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 102(51),
18626–18631.
Deco, G., Jirsa, V.K., & McIntosh, A.R. (2011).
Emerging concepts for the dynamical
organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 12(1), 43–56.
Diamond, A. & Lee, K. (2011). Interventions shown
to aid executive function development in children
4 to 12 years old. Science, 333(6045), 959–964.
Diamond, A. (2010). The evidence base for improving
school outcomes by addressing the whole child
and by addressing skills and attitudes, not just
content. Early Education and Development, 21(5),
780–793.
Diamond, A. (2011). Biological and social influences
on cognitive control processes dependent on
prefrontal cortex. Progress in Brain Research, 189,
319–339.
Diamond, A., Barnett, W.S., Thomas, J., & Munro, S.
(2007). Preschool program improves cognitive
control. Science, 318(5855), 1387–1388.
Diekhof, E.K., Falkai, P., & Gruber, O. (2008).
Functional neuroimaging of reward processing
and decision-making: A review of aberrant
motivational and affective processing in addiction
and mood disorders. Brain Research Reviews,
59(1), 164–184.
Dodge, K.A. (2006). Translational science in action:
Hostile attributional style and the development of
aggressive behavior problems. Development and
Psychopathology, 18(3), 791–814.

24

Whitten, 2012

Dodge, K.A., & Pettit, G.S. (2003). A biopsychosocial
model of the development of chronic conduct
problems in adolescence. Development and
Psychopathology, 39(2), 349–371.
Dosch, M., Loenneker, T., Bucher, K., Martin, E., &
Klaver, P. (2010). Learning to appreciate others:
Neural development of cognitive perspective
taking. Neuroimage, 50(2), 837–846.
Drabant, E.M., McRae, K., Manuck, S.B., Hariri,
A.R., & Gross, J.J. (2009). Individual differences
in typical reappraisal use predict amygdala and
prefrontal responses. Biological Psychiatry, 65(5),
367–373.
Eckenrode, J., Campa, M., Luckey, D.W., Henderson,
C.R. Jr., Cole, R., Kitzman, H., . . . Olds, D. (2010).
Long-term effects of prenatal and infancy nurse
home visitation on the life course of youths: 19year follow-up of a randomized trial. Archives of
Pediatric and Adolescence Medicine, 164(1), 9–15.
Eisenberg, N., Spinrad, T.L., & Eggum, N.D. (2010).
Emotion-related self-regulation and its relation
to children’s maladjustment. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 6, 495–525.
Eisenberger, N.I., Taylor, S.E., Gable, S.L., Hilmert,
C.J., & Lieberman, M.D. (2007). Neural pathways
link social support to attenuated neuroendocrine
stress responses. Neuroimage, 35(4), 1601–1612.
Eisenberger, N.I., Way, B.M., Taylor, S.E., Welch,
W.T., & Lieberman, M.D. (2007). Understanding
genetic risk for aggression: Clues from the brain’s
response to social exclusion. Biological Psychiatry,
61(9), 1100–1108.
Ellis, M.L., Weiss, B., & Lochman, J.E. (2009).
Executive functions in children: Associations with
aggressive behavior and appraisal processing.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 37(7),
945–956.
Falk, E.B., Berkman, E.T., & Lieberman, M.D. (2012).
From neural responses to population behavior:
Neural focus group predicts population-level
media effects. Psychological Science 23(5),
439–445.

RTI Press

Falk, E.B., Berkman, E.T., Whalen, D., & Lieberman,
M.D. (2011). Neural activity during health
messaging predicts reductions in smoking above
and beyond self-report. Health Psychology, 30(2),
177–185.
Fenton, A., Meynell, L., & Baylis, F. (2009). Ethical
challenges and interpretive difficulties with nonclinical applications of pediatric FMRI. American
Journal of Bioethics, 9(1), 3–13.
Filiou, M.D., & Turck, C.W. (2011). General
overview: Biomarkers in neuroscience research.
International Review of Neurobiology, 101, 1–17.
Fishbein, D. (2011). Advancing the prevention of
substance abuse via translational research. (RTI
Press Publication No. RB-0003-1108). Research
Triangle Park, NC: RTI Press. Retrieved from
http://www.rti.org/pubs/rb-0003-1108-fishbein.
pdf
Fishbein, D., & Tarter, R. (2009). Infusing
neuroscience into the study and prevention
of drug misuse and co-occurring aggressive
behavior. Substance Use and Misuse, 44(9–10),
1204–1235.
Fisher, P.A., Lester, B.M., DeGarmo, D.S., Lagasse, L.L.,
Lin, H., Shankaran, S., . . . Higgins, R. (2011). The
combined effects of prenatal drug exposure and
early adversity on neurobehavioral disinhibition
in childhood and adolescence. Development and
Psychopathology, 23(3), 777–788.
Forbes, E.E., Olino, T.M., Ryan, N.D., Birmaher, B.,
Axelson, D., Moyles, D.L., & Dahl, R.E. (2010).
Reward-related brain function as a predictor of
treatment response in adolescents with major
depressive disorder. Cognitive, Affective, and
Behavioral Neuroscience, 10(1), 107–118.
Fortier, E., Noreau, A., Lepore, F., Boivin, M., Pérusse,
D., Rouleau, G.A., & Beauregard, M. (2010).
Early impact of 5-HTTLPR polymorphism on the
neural correlates of sadness. Neuroscience Letters,
485(3), 261–265.
Fu, C.H., Williams, S.C., Cleare, A.J., Scott, J.,
Mitterschiffthaler, M.T., Walsh, N.D., . . .
Murray, R.M. (2008). Neural responses to sad
facial expressions in major depression following
cognitive behavioral therapy. Biological Psychiatry,
64(6), 505–512.

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

Fusar-Poli, P., Placentino, A., Carletti, F., Landi, P.,
Allen, P., Surguladze, S., . . . Politi, P. (2009).
Functional atlas of emotional faces processing:
A voxel-based meta-analysis of 105 functional
magnetic resonance imaging studies. Journal of
Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 34(6), 418–432.
Gianaros, P.J., & Manuck, S.B. (2010). Neurobiological
pathways linking socioeconomic position and
health. Psychosomatic Medicine, 72(5), 450–461.
Gifford-Smith, M., Dodge, K.A., Dishion, T.J., &
McCord, J. (2005). Peer influence in children
and adolescents: Crossing the bridge from
developmental to intervention science. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 33(3), 255–265.
Glover, G.H. (2011). Overview of functional magnetic
resonance imaging. Neurosurgery Clinics of North
America, 22(2), 133–139.
Goveas, J.S., Xie, C., Ward, B.D., Wu, Z., Li, W.,
Franczak, M., . . . Li, S.J. (2011). Recovery of
hippocampal network connectivity correlates
with cognitive improvement in mild Alzheimer’s
disease patients treated with donepezil assessed by
resting-state fMRI. Journal of Magnetic Resonance
Imaging, 34(4), 764–773.
Greicius, M. (2008). Resting-state functional
connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
Current Opinion in Neurology, 21(4), 424–430.
Hackman, D.A., & Farah, M.J. (2009). Socioeconomic
status and the developing brain. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 13(2), 65–73.
Hackman, D.A., Farah, M.J., & Meaney, M.J. (2010).
Socioeconomic status and the brain: Mechanistic
insights from human and animal research. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 11(9), 651–659.
Hamilton, J.P., Glover, G.H., Hsu, J.J., Johnson, R.F.,
& Gotlib, I.H. (2011). Modulation of subgenual
anterior cingulate cortex activity with real-time
neurofeedback. Human Brain Mapping, 32(1),
22–31.
Hampel, H., Prvulovic, D., Teipel, S.J., & Bokde, A.L.
(2011). Recent developments of functional
magnetic resonance imaging research for drug
development in Alzheimer’s disease. Progress in
Neurobiology, 95(4), 570–578.

25

Hariri, A.R. (2009). The neurobiology of individual
differences in complex behavioral traits. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 32, 225–247.
Hasler, G., & Northoff, G. (2011). Discovering
imaging endophenotypes for major depression.
Molecular Psychiatry, 16(6), 604–619.
Heatherton, T.F. & Wagner, D.D. (2011). Cognitive
neuroscience of self-regulation failure. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 15(3), 132–139.
Heeger, D.J., & Ress, D. (2002). What does fMRI
tell us about neuronal activity? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 3(2), 142–151.
Houdé, O., Rossi, S., Lubin, A., & Joliot M. (2010).
Mapping numerical processing, reading, and
executive functions in the developing brain: An
fMRI meta-analysis of 52 studies including 842
children. Developmental Science, 13(6), 876–885.
Hughes, C., & Ensor, R. (2011). Individual differences
in growth in executive function across the
transition to school predict externalizing and
internalizing behaviors and self-perceived
academic success at 6 years of age. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 108(3), 663–676.
Hulvershorn, L.A., Cullen, K., & Anand, A. (2011).
Toward dysfunctional connectivity: A review
of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major
depressive disorder. Brain Imaging and Behavior,
5(4), 307–328.
Iacono, W.G., Malone, S.M., & McGue, M. (2008).
Behavioral disinhibition and the development
of early-onset addiction: Common and specific
influences. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology,
4, 325–348.
Ide, J.S., & Li, C.S. (2011). Error-related functional
connectivity of the habenula in humans. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience, 5, 25.
Illes, J., & Bird, S.J. (2006). Neuroethics: A modern
context for ethics in neuroscience. Trends in
Neuroscience, 29(9), 511–517.
Illes, J., & Raffin, T.A. (2005). No child left without
a brain scan? Toward a pediatric neuroethics.
Cerebrum, 7(3), 33–46.

26

RTI Press

Whitten, 2012

Johansen-Berg, H., & Rushworth, M.F. (2009). Using
diffusion imaging to study human connectional
anatomy. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 32,
75–94.
Johnston, S.J., Boehm, S.G., Healy, D., Goebel, R., &
Linden, D.E. (2010). Neurofeedback: A promising
tool for the self-regulation of emotion networks.
Neuroimage, 9(1), 1066–1072.
Joseph, J.E., Liu, X., Jiang, Y., Lynam, D., & Kelly, T.H.
(2009). Neural correlates of emotional reactivity
in sensation seeking. Psychological Science, 20(2),
215–223.
Kaddurah-Daouk, R., Rozen, S., Matson, W., Han, X.,
Hulette, C.M., Burke, J.R., . . . Welsh-Bohmer,
K.A. (2011). Metabolomic changes in autopsyconfirmed Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &
Dementia, 7(3), 309–317.
Kellam, S.G., Brown, C.H., Poduska, J.M., Ialongo, N.S.,
Wang, W., Toyinbo, P., . . . Wilcox, H.C. (2008).
Effects of a universal classroom behavior
management program in first and second grades
on young adult behavioral, psychiatric, and
social outcomes. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
95(Supplement 1), S5–S28.
Keyes, K.M., McLaughlin, K.A., Koenen, K.C.,
Goldmann, E., Uddin, M., & Galea, S. (2012).
Child maltreatment increases sensitivity to
adverse social contexts: Neighborhood physical
disorder and incident binge drinking in Detroit.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 122(1–2), 77–85.
Kilpatrick, L.A., Suyenobu, B.Y., Smith, S.R., Bueller,
J.A., Goodman, T., Creswell, J.D., . . . Naliboff,
B.D. (2011). Impact of mindfulness-based stress
reduction training on intrinsic brain connectivity.
Neuroimage, 56(1), 290–298.
Kim, H. (2011). Neural activity that predicts
subsequent memory and forgetting: A metaanalysis of 74 fMRI studies. Neuroimage, 54(3),
2446–2461.

Kitzman, H.J., Olds, D.L., Cole, R.E., Hanks, C.A.,
Anson, E.A., Arcoleo, K.J., . . . Holmberg, J.R.
(2010). Enduring effects of prenatal and infancy
home visiting by nurses on children: Follow-up of
a randomized trial among children at age 12 years.
Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine,
164(5), 412–418.
Kober, H., Mende-Siedlecki, P., Kross, E.F., Weber, J.,
Mischel, W., Hart, C.L., & Ochsner, K.N. (2010).
Prefrontal-striatal pathway underlies cognitive
regulation of craving. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107(33), 14811–14816.
Koyama, M.S., Di Martino, A., Zuo, X.N., Kelly, C.,
Mennes, M., Jutagir, D.R., . . . Milham, M.P.
(2011). Resting-state functional connectivity
indexes reading competence in children and
adults. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(23), 8617–
8624.
Kuhl, P.K. (2010). Brain mechanisms in early
language acquisition. Neuron, 67(5), 713–727.
Laconte, S.M. (2011). Decoding fMRI brain states in
real-time. Neuroimage, 56(2), 440–454.
Lan, X., Legare, C.H., Ponitz, C.C., Li, S., & Morrison, F.J.
(2011). Investigating the links between the
subcomponents of executive function and
academic achievement: A cross-cultural analysis
of Chinese and American preschoolers. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 108(3), 677–692.
Langleben, D.D., Loughead, J.W., Ruparel, K.,
Hakun, J.G., Busch-Winokur, S., Holloway, M.B.,
. . . Lerman, C. (2009). Reduced prefrontal and
temporal processing and recall of high “sensation
value” ads. Neuroimage, 46(1), 219–225.
Liang, P., Wang, Z., Yang, Y., Jia, X., & Li, K. (2011).
Functional disconnection and compensation
in mild cognitive impairment: Evidence from
DLPFC connectivity using resting-state fMRI.
PLoS One, 6(7), e22153. doi:10.1371/journal
/pone.0022153
Linden, D., & Thome, J. (2011). Modern
neuroimaging in psychiatry: Towards the
integration of functional and molecular
information. World Journal of Biological
Psychiatry, 12 (Suppl 1), 6–10.

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

Linden, D.E. (2006). How psychotherapy changes
the brain—the contribution of functional
neuroimaging. Molecular Psychiatry, 11(6),
528–538.
Linden, D.E. (2012). The challenges and promise of
neuroimaging in psychiatry. Neuron, 73(1), 8–22.
Linden, D.E., & Fallgatter, A.J. (2009). Neuroimaging
in psychiatry: From bench to bedside. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 3, 49.
Lista, S., Faltraco, F., & Hampel, H. (2012, June 26).
Blood and plasma-based proteomic biomarker
research in Alzheimer’s disease. Progress in
Neurobiology. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.06.007
Logothetis, N.K., Pauls, J., Augath, M., Trinath, T.,
& Oeltermann, A. (2001). Neurophysiological
investigation of the basis of the fMRI signal.
Nature, 412(6843), 150–157.
Loman, M.M., & Gunnar, M.R. (2010). Early
experience and the development of stress
reactivity and regulation in children. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 34(6), 867–876.
Loth, E., Carvalho, F., & Schumann, G. (2011).
The contribution of imaging genetics to the
development of predictive markers for addictions.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(9), 436–446.
Luna, B., Padmanabhan, A., & O’Hearn, K. (2010).
What has fMRI told us about the development of
cognitive control through adolescence? Brain and
Cognition, 72(1), 101–113.
Lupien, S.J., McEwen, B.S., Gunnar, M.R., & Heim, C.
(2009). Effects of stress throughout the lifespan
on the brain, behaviour and cognition. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 10(6), 434–445.
Magland, J.F., Tjoa, C.W., & Childress, A.R. (2011).
Spatio-temporal activity in real time (STAR):
Optimization of regional fMRI feedback.
Neuroimage, 55(3), 1044–1053.
Malhi, G.S., & Lagopoulos, J. (2008). Making sense
of neuroimaging in psychiatry. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 117(2), 100–117.

27

Masten, C.L., Eisenberger, N.I., Borofsky, L.A.,
McNealy, K., Pfeifer, J.H., & Dapretto, M. (2011).
Subgenual anterior cingulate responses to peer
rejection: A marker of adolescents’ risk for
depression. Development and Psychopathology,
23(1), 283–292.
McCaig, R.G., Dixon, M., Keramatian, K., Liu, I., &
Christoff, K. (2011). Improved modulation of
rostrolateral prefrontal cortex using real-time
fMRI training and meta-cognitive awareness.
Neuroimage, 55(3), 1298–1305.
Mead, H.K., Beauchaine, T.P., & Shannon, K.E.
(2010). Neurobiological adaptations to
violence across development. Development and
Psychopathology, 22(1), 1–22.
Miller, G.A. (2010). Mistreating psychology in the
decades of the brain. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 5, 716–743.
Mischel, W., Ayduk, O., Berman, M.G., Casey, B.J.,
Gotlib, I.H., Jonides, J., . . . Shoda, Y. (2011).
“Willpower” over the life span: Decomposing
self-regulation. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 6(2), 252–256.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M.I. (1989).
Delay of gratification in children. Science,
244(4907), 933–938.
Moffitt, T.E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N.,
Hancox, R.J., Harrington, H., …, Caspi, A. (2011).
A gradient of childhood self-control predicts
health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the
National Academy Sciences, 108(7), 2693–2698.
Morasch, K.C. & Bell, MA. (2011). The role of
inhibitory control in behavioral and physiological
expressions of toddler executive function.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 108(3),
593–606.
Negishi, M., Martuzzi, R., Novotny, E.J., Spencer,
D.D., & Constable, R.T. (2011). Functional MRI
connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome
of epilepsy. Epilepsia, 52(9), 1733–1740.

28

RTI Press

Whitten, 2012

Olds, D.L., Kitzman, H.J., Cole, R.E., Hanks, C.A.,
Arcoleo, K.J., Anson, E.A., . . . Stevenson, A.J.
(2010). Enduring effects of prenatal and infancy
home visiting by nurses on maternal life course
and government spending: Follow-up of a
randomized trial among children at age 12 years.
Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine,
164(5), 419–424.
Olds, D.L., Robinson, J., Pettitt, L., Luckey, D.W.,
Holmberg, J., Ng, R.K., . . . Henderson, C.R. Jr.
(2004). Effects of home visits by paraprofessionals
and by nurses: Age 4 follow-up results of a
randomized trial. Pediatrics, 114(6), 1560–1568.
Pavuluri, M.N., & Sweeney, J.A. (2008). Integrating
functional brain neuroimaging and developmental
cognitive neuroscience in child psychiatry
research. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47(11), 1273–
1288.

Posner, M.I., & Rothbart, M.K. (2009). Toward a
physical basis of attention and self-regulation.
Physics of Life Reviews, 6(2), 103–120.
Powell, N.R., Lochman, J.E., & Boxmeyer, C.L. (2007).
The prevention of conduct problems. International
Review of Psychiatry, 19(6), 597–605.
Power, J.D., Fair, D.A., Schlaggar, B.L., & Petersen,
S.E. (2010). The development of human functional
brain networks. Neuron, 67(5), 735–748.
Quinones, M.P., & Kaddurah-Daouk, R. (2009).
Metabolomics tools for identifying biomarkers
for neuropsychiatric diseases. Neurobiology of
Disease, 35(2), 165–176.
Racine, E., & Illes, J. (2006). Neuroethical
responsibilities. Canadian Journal of Neurological
Sciences, 33(3), 269–277.
Raichle, M.E. (2009a). A brief history of human brain
mapping. Trends in Neurosciences, 32(2), 118–126.

Peluso, M.A., Glahn, D.C., Matsuo, K., Monkul, E.S.,
Najt, P., Zamarripa, F., . . . Soares, J.C. (2009).
Amygdala hyperactivation in untreated depressed
individuals. Psychiatry Research, 173(2), 158–161.

Raichle, M.E. (2009b). A paradigm shift in functional
brain imaging. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(41),
12729–12734.

Perry, J.L., Joseph, J.E., Jiang, Y., Zimmerman, R.S.,
Kelly, T.H., Darna, M., . . . Bardo, M.T. (2011).
Prefrontal cortex and drug abuse vulnerability:
Translation to prevention and treatment
interventions. Brain Research Reviews, 65(2),
124–149.

Raichle, M.E., & Mintun, M.A. (2006). Brain
work and brain imaging. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 29, 449–476.

Peters, J. & Büchel, C. (2010). Episodic future
thinking reduces reward delay discounting
through an enhancement of prefrontalmediotemporal interactions. Neuron, 66(1),
138–148.
Petrella, J.R., Mattay, V.S., Doraiswamy, P.M. (2008).
Imaging genetics of brain longevity and mental
wellness: The next frontier? Radiology, 246(1),
20–32.
Porto, P.R., Oliveira, L., Mari, J., Volchan, E., Figueira,
I., & Ventura, P. (2009). Does cognitive behavioral
therapy change the brain? A systematic review
of neuroimaging in anxiety disorders. Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 21(2),
114–125.

Raichle, M.E. (2010). Two views of brain function.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(4),180–190.

Raichle, M.E., & Snyder, A.Z. (2007). A default mode
of brain function: A brief history of an evolving
idea. Neuroimage, 37(4), 1083–1090.
Raichle, M.E., MacLeod, A.M., Snyder, A.Z., Powers,
W.J., Gusnard, D.A., & Shulman, G.L. (2001). A
default mode of brain function. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 98(2), 676–682.
Riggs, N.R., Greenberg, M.T., Kusché, C.A., &
Pentz, M.A. (2006). The mediational role of
neurocognition in the behavioral outcomes
of a social-emotional prevention program in
elementary school students: Effects of the PATHS
Curriculum. Prevention Science, 7(1), 91–102.
Rigucci, S., Serafini, G., Pompili, M., Kotzalidis, G.D.,
& Tatarelli, R. (2010). Anatomical and functional
correlates in major depressive disorder: The
contribution of neuroimaging studies. World
Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 11(2 Pt 2), 165–180.

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

Ritchey, M., Dolcos, F., Eddington, K.M., Strauman,
T.J., & Cabeza, R. (2011). Neural correlates of
emotional processing in depression: Changes
with cognitive behavioral therapy and predictors
of treatment response. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 45(5), 577–587.
Robbins, T.W., & Arnsten, A.F. (2009). The
neuropsychopharmacology of fronto-executive
function: Monoaminergic modulation. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 32, 267–287.
Robinson, B.L., & Shergill, S.S. (2011). Imaging in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Current Opinion In
Psychiatry, 24(1), 29–33.

29

Salisbury, A.L., Ponder, K.L., Padbury, J.F., & Lester,
B.M. (2009). Fetal effects of psychoactive drugs.
Clinical Perinatology, 36(3), 595–619.
Schardt, D.M., Erk, S., Nüsser, C., Nöthen, M.M.,
Cichon, S., Rietschel, M., . . . Walter, H. (2010).
Volition diminishes genetically mediated
amygdala hyperreactivity. Neuroimage, 53(3),
943–951.
Schepis, T.S., Adinoff, B., & Rao, U. (2008).
Neurobiological processes in adolescent addictive
disorders. American Journal on Addictions, 17(1),
6–23.

Rota, G., Handjaras, G., Sitaram, R., Birbaumer, N.,
& Dogil, G. (2011). Reorganization of functional
and effective connectivity during real-time fMRIBCI modulation of prosody processing. Brain and
Language, 117(3), 123–132.

Sebastian, C.L., Tan, G.C., Roiser, J.P., Viding,
E., Dumontheil, I., & Blakemore, S.J. (2011).
Developmental influences on the neural bases
of responses to social rejection: Implications
of social neuroscience for education.
Neuroimage, 57(3), 686–694.

Rota, G., Sitaram, R., Veit, R., Erb, M., Weiskopf, N.,
Dogil, G., & Birbaumer, N. (2009). Self-regulation
of regional cortical activity using real-time fMRI:
The right inferior frontal gyrus and linguistic
processing. Human Brain Mapping, 30(5),
1605–1614.

Sheline, Y.I., Price, J.L., Yan, Z., & Mintun, M.A.
(2010). Resting-state functional MRI in
depression unmasks increased connectivity
between networks via the dorsal nexus.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
107(24), 11020–11025.

Rubia, K. (2011). “Cool” inferior frontostriatal
dysfunction in attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder versus “hot” ventromedial orbitofrontallimbic dysfunction in conduct disorder: A
review. Biological Psychiatry, 69(12), e69–e87.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.09.023

Siegle, G.J., Carter, C.S., & Thase, M.E. (2006).
Use of fMRI to predict recovery from unipolar
depression with cognitive behavior therapy.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(4), 735–738.

Rubia, K., Halari, R., Mohammad, A.M., Taylor, E., &
Brammer, M. (2011). Methylphenidate normalizes
frontocingulate underactivation during error
processing in attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 52(9), 1733–1740.
Ruiz, S., Lee, S., Soekadar, S.R., Caria, A., Veit, R.,
Kircher, T., . . . Sitaram, R. (2011). Acquired
self-control of insula cortex modulates emotion
recognition and brain network connectivity in
schizophrenia. Human Brain Mapping. Advance
online publication. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21427
Sabatinelli, D., Fortune, E.E., Li, Q., Siddiqui, A.,
Krafft, C., Oliver, W.T., . . . Jeffries, J. (2011).
Emotional perception: Meta-analyses of face and
natural scene processing. Neuroimage, 54(3),
2524–2533.

Sobhani, M. & Bechara, A. (2011). A somatic marker
perspective of immoral and corrupt behavior.
Social Neuroscience, 6(5–6), 640–652.
Spiers, H.J., & Maguire, E.A. (2007). Decoding human
brain activity during real-world experiences.
Trends In Cognitive Sciences, 11(8), 356–365.
Sporns, O. (2011). The human connectome: A
complex network. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1224(1), 109–125.
Squire, L.R. (2009). Memory and brain systems:
1969–2009. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(41),
12711–12716.
Stadler, C., Poustka, F., & Sterzer, P. (2010). The
heterogeneity of disruptive behavior disorders—
implications for neurobiological research and
treatment. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 1, 21.

30

Whitten, 2012

RTI Press

Sterzer, P., & Stadler, C. (2009). Neuroimaging of
aggressive and violent behaviour in children and
adolescents. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience,
3, 35.

Taylor, K.S., Seminowicz, D.A., & Davis, K.D. (2009).
Two systems of resting state connectivity between
the insula and cingulate cortex. Human Brain
Mapping, 30(9), 2731–2745.

Sterzer, P., Stadler, C., Krebs, A., Kleinschmidt, A., &
Poustka, F. (2005). Abnormal neural responses
to emotional visual stimuli in adolescents with
conduct disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 57(1),
7–15.

Taylor, S.E., Burklund, L.J., Eisenberger, N.I., Lehman,
B.J., Hilmert, C.J., & Lieberman, M.D. (2008).
Neural bases of moderation of cortisol stress
responses by psychosocial resources. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 95(1), 197–211.

Stiles, J. (2011). Brain development and the nature
versus nurture debate. Progress in Brain Research,
189, 3–22.

Thomason, M.E., & Thompson, P.M. (2011). Diffusion
imaging, white matter, and psychopathology.
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7, 63–85.

Stiles, J., & Jernigan, T.L. (2010). The basics of brain
development. Neuropsychology Review, 20(4),
327–348.

Thomason, M.E., Hamilton, J.P., & Gotlib, I.H. (2011).
Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis predicts
connectivity between subgenual cingulate and
salience network during rest in adolescents.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 52(10),
1026–1034.

Supekar, K., Uddin, L.Q., Prater, K., Amin, H.,
Greicius, M.D., & Menon, V. (2012) Development
of functional and structural connectivity within
the default mode network in young children.
Neuroimage, 52(1), 290–301.
Swain, J.E. (2008). Baby stimuli and the parent brain:
Functional neuroimaging of the neural substrates
of parent-infant attachment. Psychiatry, 5(8),
28–36.
Tabibnia, G., Monterosso, J.R., Baicy, K., Aron, A.R.,
Poldrack, R.A., Chakrapani, S., . . . London, E.D.
(2011). Different forms of self-control share a
neurocognitive substrate. Journal of Neuroscience,
31(13), 4805–4810.
Tairyan, K., & Illes, J. (2009). Imaging genetics and the
power of combined technologies: A perspective
from neuroethics. Neuroscience, 164(1), 7–15.
Takahashi, H., Kato, M., Matsuura, M., Mobbs, D.,
Suhara, T., & Okubo, Y. (2009). When your gain
is my pain and your pain is my gain: Neural
correlates of envy and schadenfreude. Science,
323(5916), 937–939.
Tang, Y.Y., Ma, Y., Wang, J., Fan, Y., Feng, S., Lu, Q.,
. . . Posner, M.I. (2007). Short-term meditation
training improves attention and self-regulation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
104(43), 17152–17156.

Thomason, M.E., Yoo, D.J., Glover, G.H., & Gotlib,
I.H. (2009). BDNF genotype modulates resting
functional connectivity in children. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 3, 55.
Thompson, P.M., Martin, N.G., & Wright, M.J. (2010).
Imaging genomics. Current Opinion in Neurology,
23(4), 368–373.
Townsend, J.D., Eberhart, N.K., Bookheimer, S.Y.,
Eisenberger, N.I., Foland-Ross, L.C., Cook, A.,
. . . Altshuler, L.L. (2010). fMRI activation in
the amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex in
unmedicated subjects with major depressive
disorder. Psychiatry Research, 183(3), 209–217.
van Goozen, S.H., & Fairchild, G. (2008). How can
the study of biological processes help design new
interventions for children with severe antisocial
behavior? Development and Psychopathology,
20(3), 941–973.
Victor, T.A., Furey, M.L., Fromm, S.J., Ohman, A.,
& Drevets, W.C. (2010). Relationship between
amygdala responses to masked faces and mood
state and treatment in major depressive disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 67(11), 1128–1138.

fMRI in Translational Neuroscience

Vogel, A.C., Power, J.D., Petersen, S.E., & Schlaggar,
B.L. (2010). Development of the brain’s functional
network architecture. Neuropsychology Review,
20(4), 362–375.
Wager, T.D., Davidson, M.L., Hughes, B.L., Lindquist,
M.A., & Ochsner, K.N. (2008). Prefrontalsubcortical pathways mediating successful
emotion regulation. Neuron, 59(6), 1037–1050.
Wager, T.D., Lindquist, M.A., Nichols, T.E., Kober,
H., & Van Snellenberg, J.X. (2009). Evaluating the
consistency and specificity of neuroimaging data
using meta-analysis. Neuroimage, 45 (1 Suppl),
S210–S221.
Walter, H., Berger, M., & Schnell, K. (2009).
Neuropsychotherapy: Conceptual, empirical
and neuroethical issues. European Archives
of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 259
(Suppl 2), S173–S182.
Wang, Z., Liang, P., Jia, X., Qi, Z., Yu, L., Yang, Y., . . .
Li, K. (2011). Baseline and longitudinal patterns
of hippocampal connectivity in mild cognitive
impairment: Evidence from resting state fMRI.
Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 309(1–2),
79–85.
Webster-Stratton, C., Reid, M., & Stoolmiller, M.
(2008). Preventing conduct problems and
improving school readiness: Evaluation of the
Incredible Years Teacher and Child Training
Programs in high-risk schools. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 49(5), 471–488.

31

Welsh, J.A., Nix, R.L., Blair, C., Bierman, K.L., &
Nelson, K.E. (2010). The development of cognitive
skills and gains in academic school readiness for
children from low-income families. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 102(1), 43–53.
Wiebe, S.A., Sheffield, T., Nelson, J.M., Clark, C.A.,
Chevalier, N., & Espy, K.A. (2011). The structure
of executive function in 3-year-olds. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 108(3), 436–452.
Wiedemann, K. (2011). Biomarkers in development
of psychotropic drugs. Dialogues in Clinical
Neuroscience, 13(2), 225–234.
Wilens, T.E., & Spencer, T.J. (2010). Understanding
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder from
childhood to adulthood. Postgraduate Medicine,
122(5), 97–109.
Yang, H., Wu, Q.Z., Guo, L.T., Li, Q.Q., Long, X.Y.,
Huang, X.Q., . . . Gong, Q.Y. (2011). Abnormal
spontaneous brain activity in medication-naïve
ADHD children: A resting state fMRI study.
Neuroscience Letters, 502(2), 89–93.
Yoo, J.J., Hinds, O., Ofen, N., Thompson, T.W.,
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Triantafyllou, C., &
Gabrieli, J.D. (2011). When the brain is prepared
to learn: Enhancing human learning using realtime fMRI. Neuroimage, 59(1), 846–852.
Zhang, D., & Raichle, M.E. (2010). Disease and the
brain’s dark energy. Nature Reviews Neurology,
6(1), 15–28.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Dr. Diana Fishbein of RTI’s Transdisciplinary
Science and Translational Prevention Program for guidance and thoughtful
review of the manuscript and Dr. Julie Ann Miller and Mr. Andrew Keegan for
excellent editorial support. Development of this manuscript was supported by
an RTI Professional Development Award.

RTI International is an independent, nonprofit research organization dedicated
to improving the human condition by turning knowledge into practice. RTI
offers innovative research and technical solutions to governments and businesses
worldwide in the areas of health and pharmaceuticals, education and training,
surveys and statistics, advanced technology, international development,
economic and social policy, energy and the environment, and laboratory and
chemistry services.
The RTI Press complements traditional publication outlets by providing another
way for RTI researchers to disseminate the knowledge they generate. This PDF
document is offered as a public service of RTI International.
www.rti.org/rtipress

RTI Press publication OP-0010-1212

