	  
	  
	  
	  

INTRINSIC	  FUNCTIONAL	  BRAIN	  NETWORKS	  IN	  HEALTH	  AND	  DISEASE	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
PhD	  thesis	  
at	  the	  Graduate	  School	  of	  Systemic	  Neurosciences	  
Ludwig-­‐Maximilians	  Universität	  
by	  	  
Dr.med.	  Valentin	  Riedl	  
	  
	  
March	  2012	  
Munich,	  Germany	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Supervisor:	  Dr	  Afra	  Wohlschläger	  
2nd	  expert	  appraiser:	  Prof	  Dr	  Anna	  Schubö	  
Oral defense: 19.07.2012

	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Content	  
1	  

Abbreviations	  

3	  

2	  

List	  of	  publications	  

4	  

3	  

Declaration	  of	  contribution	  as	  co-­‐author	  

4	  

4	  

Summary	  

5	  

5	  

Aims	  of	  the	  thesis	  

5	  

6	  

Introduction	  

6	  

6.1	   Imaging	  cognitive	  processes	  with	  functional	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  

7	  

6.2	   Imaging	  the	  brain’s	  resting	  state	  

8	  

6.3	   Intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  in	  the	  resting	  state	  

9	  

6.4	   Investigating	  modulations	  and	  plasticity	  of	  intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  

12	  

7	  

Paper	  1:	  Towards	  discovery	  science	  of	  human	  brain	  function	  (PNAS	  2010)	  

14	  

8	  

Paper	  2:	  Repeated	  pain	  induces	  adaptations	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  to	  reflect	  past	  and	  predict	  	  

	  

future	  pain	  (Neuroimage	  2011)	  

9	  

Paper	  3:	  Intrinsic	  network	  connectivity	  reflects	  consistency	  of	  synesthetic	  experiences	  	  	  

	  

(J	  Neurosci	  2012)	  

30	  

40	  

10	   Paper	  4:	  Selective	  changes	  of	  resting-­‐state	  networks	  in	  individuals	  at	  risk	  for	  	  
	  

Alzheimer’s	  disease	  (PNAS	  2007)	  

48	  

11	   Paper	  5:	  Increased	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  the	  striatum	  reflects	  symptom	  dimensions	  in	  
	  

schizophrenia	  (Schizophr	  Bull	  2012)	  

59	  

12	   Discussion	  

73	  

12.1	  Organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  influences	  behavior	  in	  healthy	  subjects	  

73	  

12.2	  Intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  and	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases	  

76	  

12.3	  Overall	  conclusion	  on	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  

78	  

13	   References	  

80	  

14	   Acknowledgments	  

85	  

15	   Statutory	  declaration	  and	  statement	  

85	  

16	   CV	  

86	  

	  
	  

2	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

1

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Abbreviations	  

AD	  	  

	  

-­‐	  Alzheimer’s	  Disease	  

ADHD	   	  

-­‐	  Attention	  Deficit	  Hyperactivity	  Disorder	  

BLP	  

-­‐	  Band-­‐Limited	  Power	  

	  

BOLD	   	  

-­‐	  Blood-­‐Oxygen-­‐Level-­‐Dependent	  

DMN	   	  

-­‐	  Default	  Mode	  Network	  (ICN)	  

EEG	   	  

-­‐	  Electroencephalography	  

ECoG	   	  

-­‐	  Electrocorticography	  

FC	  	  

-­‐	  Functional	  Connectivity	  

	  

fMRI	  	   	  

-­‐	  Functional	  MRI	  

ICA	  	  

-­‐	  Independent	  Component	  Analysis	  

	  

ICN	  	   	  

-­‐	  Intrinsic	  Connectivity	  Network	  

FC	  	  

-­‐	  Intrinsic	  FC	  

	  

LFF	  	   	  

-­‐	  Low	  Frequency	  Fluctuations	  

MCI	  	   	  

-­‐	  Mild	  Cognitive	  Impairment	  

MRI	  	   	  

-­‐	  Magnetic	  Resonance	  Imaging	  

PET	  	   	  

-­‐	  Positron-­‐Emission-­‐Tomography	  

ROI	  	   	  

-­‐	  Region-­‐of-­‐interest	  

rs-­‐fMRI	  

-­‐	  resting	  state	  fMRI	  

SC	  	  

-­‐	  Structural	  Connectivity	  

	  

SMN	  	   	  

-­‐	  Sensorimotor	  Network	  (ICN)	  

SN	  

-­‐	  Salience	  Network	  (ICN)	  

	  

vmPFC	  	  

-­‐	  Ventromedial	  Prefrontal	  Cortex	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

3	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

2

Valentin Riedl, 2012

List	  of	  publications	  

Toward discovery science of human brain function.
Biswal BB, Mennes M, Zuo XN, Gohel S, Kelly C, Smith SM, Beckmann CF, Adelstein JS, Buckner
RL, Colcombe S, Dogonowski AM, Ernst M, Fair D, Hampson M, Hoptman MJ, Hyde JS, Kiviniemi VJ,
Kötter R, Li SJ, Lin CP, Lowe MJ, Mackay C, Madden DJ, Madsen KH, Margulies DS, Mayberg HS,
McMahon K, Monk CS, Mostofsky SH, Nagel BJ, Pekar JJ, Peltier SJ, Petersen SE, Riedl V,
Rombouts SA, Rypma B, Schlaggar BL, Schmidt S, Seidler RD, Siegle GJ, Sorg C, Teng GJ, Veijola
J, Villringer A, Walter M, Wang L, Weng XC, Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Williamson P, Windischberger C,
Zang YF, Zhang HY, Castellanos FX, Milham MP.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 9;107(10):4734-9. IF:9,8

	  
Repeated pain induces adaptations of intrinsic brain activity to reflect past and predict future
pain.
Riedl V, Valet M, Wöller A, Sorg C, Vogel D, Sprenger T, Boecker H, Wohlschläger AM, Tölle TR.
Neuroimage. 2011 Jul 1;57(1):206-13. IF:6,0

	  
Intrinsic network connectivity reflects consistency of synesthetic experiences.
Dovern A, Fink GR, Fromme CB, Wohlschlaeger AM, Weiss PH, Riedl V.
J Neurosci. 2012 May 30;32(22):7614-21. IF:7,3

	  
Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease.
Sorg C, Riedl V, Mühlau M, Calhoun VD, Eichele T, Läer L, Drzezga A, Förstl H, Kurz A, Zimmer C,
Wohlschläger AM.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 20;104(47):18760-5. IF:9,6
Increased intrinsic brain activity in the striatum reflects symptom dimensions in schizophrenia.
Sorg C, Manoliu A, Neufang S, Myers N, Peters H, Schwerthoeffer D, Scherr M, Muehlau M, Zimmer
C, Drzega A, Foerstl H, Baeuml J, Eichele T, Wohlschlaeger AM, Riedl V.
Schizophr Bull. 2012 Jan 12 [Epup ahead of print] IF:8,3

3

Declaration	  of	  contribution	  as	  co-­‐author	  

Valentin	  Riedl	  (VR)	  designed	  the	  study,	  analyzed	  the	  data	  and	  co-­‐wrote	  the	  paper	  Sorg	  
et	  al	  (2007)	  resulting	  in	  a	  shared	  1st	  authorship.	  VR	  analyzed	  the	  data	  and	  wrote	  the	  
paper	  Riedl	  et	  al	  (2011).	  VR	  supervised	  data	  analyses	  and	  co-­‐wrote	  the	  papers	  Dovern	  
et	  al	  (2012)	  and	  Sorg	  et	  al	  (2012)	  resulting	  in	  the	  senior	  position.	  VR	  performed	  
research	  and	  contributed	  analytic	  tools	  to	  the	  paper	  Biswal	  et	  al	  (2010).	  

	  

4	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

4

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Summary	  

The	  majority	  of	  energy	  consumed	  by	  the	  brain	  is	  dedicated	  to	  intrinsic	  neuronal	  
signaling.	  Recently,	  methods	  emerged	  that	  allow	  the	  investigation	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  
activity	  in	  the	  resting	  brain	  with	  functional	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  (fMRI).	  These	  
functional	  connectivity	  (FC)	  methods	  detect	  large	  scale	  brain	  networks	  of	  coherent,	  
ongoing	  signal	  fluctuations,	  called	  resting	  state	  or	  intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  (ICN).	  
ICNs	  consistently	  occur	  in	  humans	  across	  the	  whole	  life	  span,	  during	  waking,	  sleep,	  and	  
altered	  levels	  of	  consciousness.	  Furthermore	  ICNs	  have	  been	  detected	  in	  other	  species	  
like	  rats	  and	  monkeys.	  Therefore,	  the	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  of	  coherent	  brain	  
activity	  is	  a	  fundamental	  organizational	  principle	  of	  the	  brain.	  	  
The	  papers	  of	  this	  thesis	  cover	  resting-­‐state	  fMRI	  (rs-­‐fMRI)	  studies	  with	  healthy	  subjects	  
and	  patients	  with	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases.	  We	  report	  FC	  methods	  to	  analyze	  
organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  as	  an	  emerging	  tool	  for	  discovery	  science	  of	  the	  brain.	  
We	  then	  revealed	  plasticity	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  network	  connectivity	  of	  healthy	  subjects	  that	  
repeatedly	  experienced	  pain.	  Furthermore,	  we	  showed	  that	  altered	  sensory	  experiences	  
in	  healthy	  individuals	  with	  synesthesia	  correlate	  with	  altered	  connectivity	  between	  
sensory	  ICNs	  in	  the	  resting	  state.	  We	  also	  investigated	  ICNs	  in	  patients	  with	  
neuropsychiatric	  diseases.	  First,	  we	  showed	  selective	  changes	  in	  two	  cortical	  ICNs	  in	  
patients	  with	  early	  Alzheimer’s	  Disease.	  And	  second,	  we	  revealed	  altered	  intrinsic	  FC	  in	  
a	  subcortical	  ICN	  that	  correlates	  with	  symptom	  dimensions	  in	  patients	  with	  
schizophrenia.	  These	  data	  show	  that	  networks	  of	  ongoing	  brain	  activity	  form	  an	  
intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  in	  the	  human	  brain	  that	  is	  robustly	  detectable	  in	  rs-­‐
fMRI	  data.	  Moreover,	  dynamic	  changes	  occur	  in	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  
healthy	  and	  diseased	  brains	  and	  these	  changes	  are	  related	  to	  differences	  in	  sensory	  
experiences	  or	  behavior.	  

5

Aims	  of	  the	  thesis	  

Analysis	  of	  resting	  state	  fMRI	  data	  with	  multivariate	  methods	  to	  characterize	  and	  detect	  	  
-­‐	  ICNs	  as	  the	  organizational	  principle	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  	  
-­‐	  Plasticity	  of	  ICNs	  in	  healthy	  subjects	  after	  sensory	  experiences	  
-­‐	  Alterations	  of	  ICNs	  in	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases	  
	  
	  

	  
5	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

6

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Introduction	  

In	  the	  last	  three	  decades,	  neuroimaging	  evolved	  as	  a	  new	  discipline	  to	  investigate	  the	  
neurobiological	  correlates	  of	  human	  behavior.	  The	  two	  major	  techniques,	  positron-­‐
emission-­‐tomography	  (PET)	  and	  functional	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  (fMRI),	  allow	  
the	  mapping	  of	  human	  brain	  function	  by	  revealing	  spatial	  patterns	  of	  brain	  regions	  that	  
activate	  or	  deactivate	  in	  a	  variety	  of	  cognitive	  tasks,	  from	  simple	  sensory	  to	  complex	  
cognitive	  processing	  like	  emotions	  and	  decision-­‐making1,2.	  Still,	  the	  brain	  consumes	  
most	  energy	  already	  in	  the	  resting	  state	  when	  a	  subject	  is	  not	  involved	  in	  performing	  
any	  externally	  oriented	  task3	  (see	  Figure	  1).	  So	  far,	  this	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  has	  not	  
been	  the	  focus	  of	  interest	  in	  the	  analysis	  of	  neuroimaging	  data,	  but	  only	  served	  as	  a	  
reference,	  or	  baseline	  in	  comparison	  to	  task	  conditions4.	  To	  fully	  understand	  the	  
neurobiological	  correlate	  of	  human	  behavior	  it	  is	  crucial	  not	  only	  to	  investigate	  the	  
causes	  of	  regional	  activations	  or	  deactivations	  but	  also	  to	  explore	  the	  organizational	  
principle	  of	  the	  intrinsic	  brain	  state	  and	  how	  its	  activity	  influences	  immediate	  behavior.	  
This	  thesis	  will	  approach	  these	  questions	  by	  investigating	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  
activity	  with	  rs-­‐fMRI	  and	  its	  modulation	  by	  sensory	  experiences	  and	  in	  neuropsychiatric	  
diseases.	  	  

	  
Figure 1: Whole body glucose consumption. In the resting state brain blood flow accounts for 11% of the
cardiac output and brain metabolism accounts for 20% of the energy consumption of the body,
overshadowing the metabolism of other organs such as the heart, liver and skeletal muscle as shown in
this classic image of whole body glucose consumption. Taken from5.

	  

6	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE
6.1

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Imaging	  cognitive	  processes	  with	  functional	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  

Functional	  neuroimaging	  is	  a	  noninvasive	  method	  for	  mapping	  human	  brain	  function	  
with	  PET	  and	  fMRI6	  (for	  review,	  see2,7,8).	  FMRI	  indirectly	  measures	  mass	  neuronal	  
activity	  in	  circumscribed	  volumes,	  or	  voxels,	  of	  the	  brain9.	  The	  method	  relies	  on	  the	  fact	  
that	  increased	  neuronal	  activity	  induces	  increased	  blood	  flow	  in	  the	  same	  voxel	  or	  brain	  
region.	  As	  a	  consequence,	  the	  ratio	  of	  available	  oxygen	  bound	  to	  oxygenated	  
hemoglobin,	  also	  increases.	  All	  these	  parameters,	  i.e.	  tissue	  perfusion,	  blood-­‐volume	  
changes,	  and	  changes	  in	  the	  concentration	  of	  oxygen	  can	  be	  used	  to	  indirectly	  infer	  
changes	  in	  neuronal	  activity.	  However,	  the	  blood-­‐oxygen-­‐level-­‐dependent	  (BOLD)	  signal	  
is	  the	  parameter	  most	  often	  reported	  since	  its	  discovery	  in	  animal	  10	  and	  human	  brain	  
imaging	  studies11-­‐13.	  	  
REVIEWS

	  
3.0

Open

% BOLD change

2.5

Closed

Open

Closed

Open

Closed

Open

Closed

2.0
1.5

Open – Closed =

1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1

0

50

100

150

200

250

Time (sec)

Figure 1 | Traditional fMRI analysis and BOLD noise. Unaveraged blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) time course
Nature
Reviews
| Neuroscience
(magenta) from a region in the primary visual cortex during a simple task paradigm that requires
subjects
to open
and close
their eyes. The paradigm is shown in blue (delayed to account for the haemodynamic response). Traditional functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) analysis involves correlating BOLD data with a stimulation time-course across multiple
blocks. This in effect averages across each condition and performs a subtraction, minimizing ‘noise’ in the BOLD signal and
highlighting regions that are modulated by the task paradigm. In this case, subtraction of the eyes-closed condition from
the eyes-open condition identifies a BOLD signal intensity difference in the primary visual cortex (shown on the right).

	  

Figure 2: Traditional fMRI analysis and BOLD noise. BOLD signal time course (magenta) from a region in
the primary visual cortex during a simple task paradigm that requires subjects to open and close their
eyes. The paradigm is shown in blue. Traditional fMRI analysis involves correlating BOLD data with a
stimulation time-course across
multiple blocks. In this case,One
subtraction
of the eyes-closed condition
spontaneous activity with task conditions and address
strategy to account for non-neuronal noise is
several important questions regarding how spontaneous

to use a high sampling rate, which prevents aliasing of

what is known
14 about the physiology of spontaneous
TakenBOLD
from
activity.and conclude with a discussion of areas
for future advancement in the field.

however, this comes with the limitation of reduced spatial
coverage. Alternatively, physiological parameters can be
measured during BOLD acquisition and removed from
the data through linear regression18–20,23,24. Finally, noise
sources can be isolated from the BOLD data itself through
techniques such as independent components analysis
(ICA, see below)25–27, regressing out signals that are common to all voxels (the global signal)16,28,29 or signals from
regions that are likely to have a relatively high degree of
physiological artefact relative to the amount of neuronal
activity, such as the ventricles or white matter24,29.
In a sense, these strategies take the place of the averaging in task-evoked studies and attempt to ensure that
spontaneous BOLD analyses are not simply interpretations of non-neuronal noise. Thoughtful implementation
allows the neurobiologically meaningful information in
spontaneous BOLD data to be emphasized.

from the eyes-open condition
BOLDWesignal
intensity
difference
in theactivity
primary
BOLDidentifies
activity should be a
interpreted.
briefly discuss
higher frequency
cardiac or respiratory
; visual cortex
(shown on the right).

Methods for analysing spontaneous BOLD data
Spontaneous neuronal activity refers to activity that is
not attributable to specific inputs or outputs; it represents neuronal activity that is intrinsically generated by
the brain. As such, fMRI studies of spontaneous activity
attempt to minimize changes in sensory input and
refrain from requiring subjects to make responses or
perform specific cognitive tasks. Most studies are conducted during continuous resting-state conditions such
as fixation on a cross-hair or eyes-closed rest. Subjects
are usually instructed simply to lie still in the scanner
and refrain from falling asleep. After data acquisition,
two important data analysis issues must be considered:
4,5
how to account for non-neuronal noise and how to
identify spatial patterns of spontaneous activity.

	  

11,12,21,22

The	  traditional	  approach	  to	  investigate	  the	  involvement	  of	  a	  brain	  region	  in	  a	  cognitive	  
task	  is	  the	  voxel-­‐wise	  comparison	  of	  the	  BOLD	  signal	  during	  a	  condition	  of	  high	  task	  
demand	  (e.g.	  viewing	  pictures	  of	  faces)	  with	  that	  during	  a	  lesser	  demanding	  baseline	  
state	  (for	  review,	  see ).	  The	  following	  two	  experiments	  illustrate	  this	  BOLD-­‐subtraction	  
Identifying spatial patterns. Techniques for identifying
spatial patterns of coherent BOLD activity, an analysis
often referred to as functional connectivity (BOX 1), are
also required. The simplest technique is to extract the
BOLD time course from a region of interest (called a
seed region) and determine the temporal correlation
between this extracted signal and the time course from
all other brain voxels (FIG. 2). This approach is widely
used owing to its inherent simplicity, sensitivity and
ease of interpretation10–14,24,29–36. However, it has some
disadvantages. The results are dependent on the a priori
definition of a seed region, multiple systems cannot be
studied simultaneously and the extracted waveform may
not be a true independent variable when assessing statistical significance. In response to these limitations other
more sophisticated techniques for analysing spontaneous BOLD data have been proposed.
Hierarchical clustering still requires a priori definition of seed regions37–40. However, instead of extracting
the time course from just one seed region, the time

method	  to	  map	  human	  brain	  function.	  When	  a	  black	  and	  white	  checkerboard	  is	  visually	  
Water phantom

Accounting for non-neuronal noise. An important difference between studies of spontaneous activity and more
traditional studies of task-evoked responses is that the
latter usually involve averaging across many trials. This
averaging eliminates noise and increases confidence
that the effect being studied is not an artefact. In studies
of spontaneous activity, the signal being analysed and
interpreted is the noise that task-evoked studies seek
to remove by averaging. A natural concern, therefore,
is that spontaneous activity results are contaminated
by or even due to an artefact, such as scanner instability
or non-neuronal physiological fluctuations. Consistent
with this concern, spontaneous BOLD fluctuations have
been observed in a water phantom16 and physiological
fluctuations, such as cardiac or respiratory activity,
account for a significant fraction of spontaneous BOLD
variance in human data17–20. Fortunately, a large amount
of work has gone into addressing this concern.

presented	  to	  human	  subjects	  for	  several	  minutes,	  primary	  and	  secondary	  visual	  areas	  in	  
Glass sphere containing water
that is used to study fMRI
signal properties in a nonbiological system.

the	  occipital	  cortex	  activate	  above	  baseline	  (when	  no	  visual	  stimulation	  is	  present)	  as	  
Linear regression

Computation of a scaling factor
such that multiplication of a
regressor time course by this
scaling factor will remove the
greatest amount of variance
when subtracted from a signal
of interest.

shown	  in	  Figure	  2.	  A	  more	  complex	  task	  of	  allocating	  attention	  to	  detect	  a	  certain	  target	  
in	  a	  visual	  scene	  reveals	  a	  distributed	  attention	  related	  network	  of	  fronto-­‐parietal	  
Voxel

cortices	  (see	  Figure	  3).	  This	  means	  that	  certain	  brain	  regions	  increase	  their	  activity	  
A volume element that is the
smallest distinguishable, boxshaped part of a threedimensional space.

consistently	  above	  baseline	  when	  an	  experimentally	  controlled	  task	  is	  performed.	  
	  
	  

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

VOLUME 8 | SEPTEMBER 2007 | 701

7	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

	  
Figure 3: Definition of dorsal and ventral networks from activation data and putative interactions. Results
from a meta-analysis of activation data. Regions in blue are consistently activated by central cues,
indicating where a peripheral object will subsequently appear or what is the feature of an upcoming
object. Regions in orange are consistently activated when attention is reoriented to an unexpected but
15

behaviorally relevant object. Taken from .

	  
6.2

Imaging	  the	  brain’s	  resting	  state	  	  

During	  the	  baseline	  condition,	  however,	  the	  resting	  brain	  is	  by	  no	  means	  in	  an	  idle	  state	  
(for	  review,	  see3).	  PET,	  a	  method	  measuring	  the	  voxel-­‐wise	  distribution	  of	  glucose	  
consumption,	  revealed	  that	  the	  resting	  brain	  consumes	  ~20%	  of	  the	  body’s	  energy	  (see	  
Figure	  1).	  The	  vast	  majority	  of	  this	  energy	  is	  provided	  by	  aerobic	  glycolysis,	  the	  
metabolism	  of	  glucose	  to	  carbon	  dioxide	  and	  water.	  Up	  to	  80%	  of	  the	  entire	  energy	  
consumption	  at	  rest	  is	  devoted	  to	  glutamate	  cycling	  and,	  hence,	  neural	  signaling	  
processes16.	  This	  means	  that	  the	  majority	  of	  energy	  consumed	  by	  the	  brain	  is	  dedicated	  
to	  intrinsic,	  ongoing	  neuronal	  signaling	  while	  the	  processing	  of	  an	  external	  task	  as	  
described	  above	  (Figure	  2)	  increases	  local	  energy	  consumption	  only	  in	  the	  range	  of	  
additional	  3-­‐5%17	  (see	  Figure	  4).	  	  
	  

	  
Figure 4: The changes in regional blood flow associated with task performance are often no more than
5% of the resting blood flow of the brain from which they were derived (center) and, hence, only
discernable in difference images averaged across subjects as shown above on the left. These modest
modulations in ongoing circulatory and metabolic activity rarely affect the overall rate of brain blood flow
and metabolism during even the most arousing perceptual and vigorous motor activity. Taken from5

	  

8	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

During	  a	  resting	  state	  scan,	  subjects	  lie	  in	  the	  scanner	  without	  performing	  an	  
experimentally	  controlled	  cognitive	  task.	  Therefore,	  the	  classical	  procedure	  of	  analyzing	  
fMRI	  data	  by	  subtracting	  the	  voxel-­‐wise	  BOLD	  signal	  of	  two	  cognitive	  conditions	  from	  
each	  other	  is	  not	  applicable	  to	  resting	  state	  data.	  Instead,	  functional	  connectivity	  (FC)	  
methods	  have	  been	  developed	  to	  detect	  correlations	  in	  the	  rs-­‐fMRI	  BOLD-­‐signal	  
between	  voxels18-­‐20:	  (i)	  Seed-­‐based	  correlational	  analyses	  detect	  the	  FC	  of	  a	  region-­‐of-­‐
interest	  (ROI)	  to	  any	  other	  ROI	  or	  ultimately	  to	  any	  other	  voxel	  in	  the	  brain.	  This	  results	  
in	  a	  whole	  brain	  connectivity	  map	  indicating	  voxels	  with	  significant	  FC	  to	  the	  seed	  
region.	  (ii)	  Data-­‐driven	  methods,	  such	  as	  independent	  component	  analysis	  (ICA)	  are	  
approaches	  where	  no	  a	  priori	  hypothesis	  about	  a	  seed	  region	  is	  needed.	  The	  ICA-­‐
algorithm	  simultaneously	  detects	  independent	  spatial	  maps	  of	  coherent,	  ongoing	  brain	  
activity	  in	  the	  rs-­‐fMRI	  data	  set.	  (iii)	  Finally,	  frequency-­‐domain	  analyses	  target	  
differences	  in	  the	  amplitude	  of	  certain	  frequency	  components	  in	  the	  BOLD	  signal21.	  After	  
transforming	  the	  time	  series	  into	  the	  frequency	  domain,	  the	  power	  spectrum	  of	  low-­‐
frequency	  (<0.1	  Hz)	  fluctuations	  (LFF)	  is	  calculated	  for	  each	  voxel	  and	  compared	  across	  
conditions	  or	  groups.	  While	  this	  last	  approach	  tests	  for	  correlations	  in	  amplitudes	  across	  
voxels	  it	  differs	  from	  the	  other	  two	  measures	  that	  test	  for	  coherence	  between	  voxel	  
time-­‐series.	  A	  single	  rs-­‐fMRI	  scan	  (as	  brief	  as	  5	  min)	  can	  thus	  be	  used	  to	  interrogate	  a	  
multitude	  of	  functional	  circuits	  simultaneously,	  without	  the	  requirement	  of	  selecting	  a	  
priori	  hypotheses22.	  Building	  on	  the	  term	  “connectome,”	  initially	  applied	  to	  the	  
comprehensive	  map	  of	  structural	  connections	  in	  the	  human	  brain23,	  the	  term	  “functional	  
connectome”	  describes	  the	  collective	  set	  of	  functional	  connections	  in	  the	  human	  brain24.	  	  
	  
6.3

Intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  in	  the	  resting	  state	  

Analyzing	  intrinsic	  FC	  of	  rs-­‐fMRI	  data	  reveals	  spontaneous	  fluctuations	  in	  the	  low	  
frequency	  band	  of	  the	  BOLD	  signal	  that	  are	  temporally	  correlated	  across	  functionally	  
related	  areas14,25	  (see	  Figure	  5).	  These	  spatial	  patterns	  of	  coherent	  intrinsic	  brain	  
activity	  have	  been	  termed	  resting	  state	  or	  intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  (ICN).	  In	  
1995,	  Bharat	  Biswal	  and	  colleagues	  described	  the	  first	  ICN	  in	  the	  motor	  system25.	  They	  
found	  that	  ongoing	  BOLD	  signal	  fluctuations	  in	  the	  right	  primary	  motor	  cortex	  are	  highly	  
correlated	  with	  the	  resting	  state	  BOLD	  signal	  in	  contralateral	  primary	  motor	  cortex,	  
premotor	  cortices	  and	  regions	  in	  the	  cerebellum.	  Thus,	  they	  detected	  a	  whole	  network	  

	  

9	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

of	  distributed	  brain	  regions	  characterized	  by	  coherent	  ongoing	  neuronal	  activity	  in	  the	  
resting	  state	  that	  is	  usually	  activated	  together	  during	  motor	  tasks.	  
	  

	  
Figure 5: Generation of resting-state correlation maps. a) Seed region in the left somatomotor cortex
(LSMC) is shown in yellow. b) Time course of spontaneous BOLD activity recorded during resting fixation
and extracted from the seed region. c) Statistical z-score map showing voxels that are significantly
correlated with the extracted time course. In addition to correlations with the right somatomotor cortex
(RSMC) and medial motor areas, correlations are observed with the secondary somatosensory
association cortex (S2), the posterior nuclei of the thalamus (Th), putamen (P) and cerebellum (Cer).
Taken from14.

	  
After	  the	  initial	  description	  of	  this	  motor	  network	  in	  rs-­‐fMRI	  data,	  further	  ICNs	  have	  
been	  repeatedly	  reported26-­‐34.	  These	  ICNs	  cover	  occipital,	  temporal	  and	  fronto-­‐parietal	  
cortices	  that	  show	  strong	  correspondence	  to	  spatial	  patterns	  known	  from	  task-­‐fMRI	  
studies	  mapping	  visual,	  sound	  or	  attention	  processing.	  One	  can	  distinguish	  primary	  ICNs	  
covering	  sensori-­‐motor	  cortices	  and	  spatially	  distributed	  ICNs	  similar	  to	  networks	  
related	  to	  higher	  cognitive	  functions	  like	  attention,	  emotion	  and	  cognitive	  control	  
processing	  (see	  Figure	  6).	  The	  primary	  ICNs	  cover	  primary	  and	  secondary	  visual	  
cortices,	  primary	  auditory	  cortices,	  somatosensory	  and	  motor/premotor	  cortices.	  ICNs	  
similar	  to	  higher	  cognitive	  functions	  are	  fronto-­‐parietal	  networks	  mimicking	  dorsal	  
(spatial)	  and	  ventral	  attention	  networks,	  insular	  networks	  related	  to	  emotion	  and	  
cognitive/executive	  control	  and	  a	  self	  related	  default	  mode	  network.	  
	  

	  

10	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

	  
Figure 6: FC within and between ICNs. (A) In this publication by Allen et al, 28 components of an ICA were
identified as ICNs. ICNs are divided into groups based on their anatomical and functional properties and
include basal ganglia, auditory, sensorimotor, visual, default-mode, attentional, and frontal networks.
32

Taken from .

	  
This	  intrinsic	  network	  architecture	  of	  ongoing	  brain	  activity	  has	  now	  emerged	  as	  a	  
common	  organizational	  principle	  in	  humans,	  monkeys,	  and	  rats30,35-­‐37.	  Studies	  have	  
provided	  insight	  into	  the	  development	  of	  ICNs	  in	  the	  maturing	  and	  aging	  brain38-­‐41,	  and	  
delineated	  the	  effects	  of	  sleep42,43,	  anesthesia44,45,	  and	  pharmacologic	  agents	  on	  rs-­‐fMRI	  
measures46,47.	  Others	  have	  investigated	  the	  anatomical	  properties	  of	  intrinsically	  
coupled	  brain	  regions.	  In	  the	  beginning,	  it	  was	  suggested	  that	  patterns	  of	  FC	  rather	  
reflect	  underlying	  anatomical	  connections,	  or	  structural	  connectivity	  (SC)36,48.	  While	  
connections	  between	  certain	  core	  regions	  indeed	  show	  this	  similarity,	  the	  majority	  of	  
functionally	  coupled	  regions	  (like	  homotopic	  functional	  regions)	  are	  not	  directly	  
anatomically	  connected49.	  This	  suggests	  a	  layer	  of	  functional	  processing	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  
functional	  architecture	  that	  reaches	  beyond	  mimicking	  anatomical	  connections.	  	  
	  
	  

11	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Finally,	  a	  large	  body	  of	  literature	  analyzed	  the	  neurophysiological	  underpinnings	  of	  
ongoing,	  coherent	  BOLD	  signal	  fluctuations	  (for	  review,	  see50).	  Typically,	  coherence	  of	  
rs-­‐fMRI	  signal	  fluctuations	  between	  cortical	  and	  subcortical	  brain	  regions	  occurs	  in	  
distinct	  bins	  of	  the	  low	  frequency	  domain	  (<0.1Hz)51.	  However,	  the	  BOLD-­‐signal	  is	  
heavily	  blurred	  and	  temporally	  sampled	  only	  every	  2-­‐3s.	  Therefore,	  these	  MRI	  
parameters	  might	  be	  responsible	  for	  the	  strong	  representation	  of	  LFF.	  Combined	  fMRI-­‐
electrophysiological	  recordings	  found	  evidence	  for	  additional	  representations	  of	  higher	  
frequencies	  in	  the	  electrical	  signal.	  In	  primates,	  neural	  spiking	  activity	  and	  the	  band-­‐
limited	  power	  (BLP)	  of	  high-­‐frequency	  gamma	  oscillations	  correlated	  best	  with	  ongoing	  
BOLD-­‐signal	  fluctuations52.	  In	  humans,	  electrocorticograhpy	  (ECoG)	  found	  correlated	  
spontaneous	  neuronal	  activity	  between	  both	  hemispheres	  of	  the	  sensorimotor	  ICN	  in	  
slow	  frequencies	  as	  well	  as	  in	  the	  gamma-­‐range	  BLP53,54.	  Furthermore,	  studies	  have	  
investigated	  the	  spatial	  similarity	  of	  electrophysiological	  and	  BOLD	  FC	  patterns	  and	  
found	  strong	  overlap	  for	  ECoG	  recordings53,55	  and	  electroencephalography	  (EEG)	  
recordings56.	  Together,	  these	  data	  suggest	  that	  the	  networks	  of	  ongoing	  BOLD	  signal	  
fluctuations	  reflect	  an	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  of	  neuronal	  activity	  in	  the	  resting	  
state	  that	  is	  more	  than	  a	  mere	  copy	  of	  anatomical	  connections.	  This	  assumption	  is	  
supported	  by	  the	  studies	  presented	  in	  this	  thesis	  as	  well	  as	  by	  an	  increasing	  amount	  of	  
work	  by	  others	  that	  show	  modulations	  of	  coherent,	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  by	  
cognitive57-­‐60	  or	  emotional61,62	  states.	  
	  
6.4

Investigating	  modulations	  and	  plasticity	  of	  intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  

The	  studies	  presented	  in	  this	  thesis	  investigate	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  with	  rs-­‐
fMRI	  and	  its	  modulation	  by	  sensory	  experiences	  and	  in	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases.	  We	  
studied	  ICNs	  in	  healthy	  subjects	  and	  patients	  with	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases.	  We	  
participated	  in	  a	  multicenter	  study	  of	  35	  research	  sites	  to	  describe	  a	  comprehensive	  and	  
ubiquitous	  set	  of	  ICNs	  in	  the	  resting	  state	  forming	  the	  human	  functional	  connectome37.	  
Although	  stable	  across	  individuals,	  we	  revealed	  modulations	  of	  intrinsic	  network	  
connectivity	  in	  healthy	  subjects	  that	  repeatedly	  experienced	  pain59	  (1st	  author).	  
Furthermore,	  we	  showed	  that	  altered	  sensory	  experiences	  in	  healthy	  individuals,	  here	  
synesthesia,	  correlate	  with	  altered	  connectivity	  between	  sensory	  ICNs	  in	  the	  resting	  
state	  (Dovern	  2011,	  J	  Neurosci,	  under	  revision)	  (senior	  author).	  We	  also	  investigated	  
ICNs	  in	  patients	  with	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases.	  First,	  we	  showed	  selective	  changes	  in	  
	  

12	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

two	  cortical	  ICNs	  in	  patients	  with	  early	  Alzheimer’s	  Disease	  (AD)	  that	  precede	  
structural	  changes	  in	  the	  same	  brain	  regions63	  (shared	  1st	  author).	  And	  second,	  we	  
revealed	  altered	  FC	  in	  a	  subcortical	  ICN	  that	  correlates	  with	  symptom	  dimensions	  in	  
patients	  with	  schizophrenia64	  (senior	  author).	  Together,	  these	  data	  show	  that	  dynamic	  
changes	  occur	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  architecture	  of	  ongoing	  brain	  activity	  in	  healthy	  and	  
diseased	  brains	  and	  these	  changes	  are	  related	  to	  differences	  in	  sensory	  experiences	  or	  
behavior.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

13	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

7

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Paper	  1:	  Towards	  discovery	  science	  of	  human	  brain	  function	  (PNAS	  2010)	  

Toward discovery science of human brain function
Bharat B. Biswala, Maarten Mennesb, Xi-Nian Zuob, Suril Gohela, Clare Kellyb, Steve M. Smithc, Christian F. Beckmannc,
Jonathan S. Adelsteinb, Randy L. Bucknerd, Stan Colcombee, Anne-Marie Dogonowskif, Monique Ernstg, Damien Fairh,
Michelle Hampsoni, Matthew J. Hoptmanj, James S. Hydek, Vesa J. Kiviniemil, Rolf Kötterm, Shi-Jiang Lin, Ching-Po Lino,
Mark J. Lowep, Clare Mackayc, David J. Maddenq, Kristoffer H. Madsenf, Daniel S. Marguliesr, Helen S. Maybergs,
Katie McMahont, Christopher S. Monku, Stewart H. Mostofskyv, Bonnie J. Nagelw, James J. Pekarx, Scott J. Peltiery,
Steven E. Petersenz, Valentin Riedlaa, Serge A. R. B. Romboutsbb, Bart Rypmacc, Bradley L. Schlaggardd, Sein Schmidtee,
Rachael D. Seidlerff,u, Greg J. Sieglegg, Christian Sorghh, Gao-Jun Tengii, Juha Veijolajj, Arno Villringeree,kk,
Martin Walterll, Lihong Wangq, Xu-Chu Wengmm, Susan Whitﬁeld-Gabrielinn, Peter Williamsonoo,
Christian Windischbergerpp, Yu-Feng Zangqq, Hong-Ying Zhangii, F. Xavier Castellanosb,j, and Michael P. Milhamb,1
a
Department of Radiology, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103; bPhyllis Green and Randolph Cōwen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, New York
University Child Study Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016; cFMRIB Centre, Oxford University, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK; dHoward Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; eSchool of Psychology, University of Wales, Bangor, UK; fDanish Research Centre for Magnetic
Resonance, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, Hvidovre, Denmark; gMood and Anxiety Disorders Program, National Institute of Mental Health/
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD 20892; hBehavioral Neuroscience Department, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, OR 97239; iDepartment of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511; jDivision of Clinical
Research, Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY 10962; kBiophysics Research Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
WI 53226; lDepartment of Diagnostic Radiology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland; mDonders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Center for
Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; nBiophysics Research Institute, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226; oInstitute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan; pImaging Institute, The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
44195; qBrain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710; rDepartment of Cognitive Neurology, Max Planck Institute
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; sDepartment of Psychiatry and Department of Neurology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322; tCentre for Advanced Imaging, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; uDepartment of Psychology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; vLaboratory for Neurocognitive and Imaging Research, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, 21205; wDepartment of
Psychiatry, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239; xF.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Baltimore, MD 21205; yFunctional MRI Laboratory, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; zMcDonnell Center for Higher Brain Functions, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; aaDepartments of Neurology and Neuroradiology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, 81675 Munich, Germany; bbInstitute of Psychology and Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden University, Leiden,
The Netherlands; ccCenter for Brain Health and School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080; ddDepartment
of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; eeDepartment of Neurology, Charité Univesitaetsmedizin-Berlin, 10117
Berlin, Germany; ffSchool of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; ggDepartment of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213; hhDepartment of Psychiatry, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, D-81675 Munich, Germany; iiJiangsu Key Laboratory of
Molecular and Functional Imaging, Department of Radiology, Zhong-Da Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China; jjDepartment of Psychiatry,
Institute of Clinical Medicine and Department of Public Health Science, Institute of Health Science, University of Oulu, Oulu 90014, Finland; kkBerlin
NeuroImaging Center, 10099 Berlin, Germany; llDepartment of Psychiatry, Otto-von-Guericke University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg 39106, Germany;
mm
Laboratory for Higher Brain Function, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100864, China; nnDepartment of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA 02139; ooDepartment of Psychiatry,
University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A3H8, Canada; ppCenter for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria; and qqState Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China

Edited* by Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, and approved January 20, 2010 (received for review October 14, 2009)

Although it is being successfully implemented for exploration of
the genome, discovery science has eluded the functional neuroimaging community. The core challenge remains the development
of common paradigms for interrogating the myriad functional
systems in the brain without the constraints of a priori hypotheses. Resting-state functional MRI (R-fMRI) constitutes a candidate
approach capable of addressing this challenge. Imaging the brain
during rest reveals large-amplitude spontaneous low-frequency
(<0.1 Hz) ﬂuctuations in the fMRI signal that are temporally correlated across functionally related areas. Referred to as functional
connectivity, these correlations yield detailed maps of complex
neural systems, collectively constituting an individual’s “functional
connectome.” Reproducibility across datasets and individuals suggests the functional connectome has a common architecture, yet
each individual’s functional connectome exhibits unique features,
with stable, meaningful interindividual differences in connectivity
patterns and strengths. Comprehensive mapping of the functional
connectome, and its subsequent exploitation to discern genetic
inﬂuences and brain–behavior relationships, will require multicenter collaborative datasets. Here we initiate this endeavor by gathering R-fMRI data from 1,414 volunteers collected independently
at 35 international centers. We demonstrate a universal architecture of positive and negative functional connections, as well as
consistent loci of inter-individual variability. Age and sex emerged
as signiﬁcant determinants. These results demonstrate that independent R-fMRI datasets can be aggregated and shared. Highthroughput R-fMRI can provide quantitative phenotypes for
molecular genetic studies and biomarkers of developmental and
4734–4739 | PNAS | March 9, 2010 | vol. 107 | no. 10

pathological processes in the brain. To initiate discovery science of
brain function, the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project dataset is
freely accessible at www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/.
database

| neuroimaging | open access | reproducibility | resting state

M

uch like the challenge of decoding the human genome, the
complexities of mapping human brain function pose a
challenge to the functional neuroimaging community. As demAuthor contributions: B.B.B., R.L.B., J.S.H., R.K., A.V., Y.Z., F.X.C., and M.P.M. designed
research; B.B.B., M.M., XN.Z., S.G., C.K., S.M.S., C.F.B., J.S.A., R.L.B., S.C., A.-M.D., M.E.,
D.F., M.H., M.J.H., J.S.H., V.J.K., R.K., SJ.L., CP.L., M.J.L., C.E.M., D.M., K.H.M., D.S.M., H.S.
M., K.M., C.S.M., S.M., B.J.N., J.J.P., S.J.P., S.E.P., V.R., S.A.R., B.R., B.L.S., S.S., R.D.S., G.S., C.S.,
GJ.T., J.M.V., A.V., M.W., L.W., XC.W., S.W.-G., P.W., C.W., Y.Z., HY.Z., F.X.C., and M.P.M.
performed research; S.M.S., C.F.B., R.L.B., S.C., A.-M.D., M.E., D.F., M.H., M.J.H., J.S.H., V.J.K.,
R.K., SJ.L., CP.L., M.J.L., C.E.M., D.M., K.H.M., D.S.M., H.S.M., K.M., C.S.M., S.M., B.J.N., J.J.P.,
S.J.P., S.E.P., V.R., S.A.R., B.R., B.L.S., S.S., R.D.S., G.S., C.S., GJ.T., J.M.V., A.V., M.W., L.W.,
XC.W., S.W.-G., P.W., C.W., Y.Z., HY.Z., B.B.B., F.X.C., and M.P.M. contributed new reagents/
analytic tools; B.B.B., M.M., XN.Z., S.G., C.K., F.X.C., and M.P.M. analyzed data; and B.B.B.,
M.M., XN.Z., C.K., J.S.A., F.X.C., and M.P.M. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
*This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: All data used in this work were released on December 11, 2009 via www.
nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: michael.milham@nyumc.org.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0911855107/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0911855107

	  
	  
	  

	  
14	  

humans and nonhuman primates (24, 25), and delineated the
effects of sleep (26), anesthesia (27), and pharmacologic agents on
R-fMRI measures (28, 29). Given the many sources of variability
inherent in fMRI, the remaining challenge is to demonstrate the
feasibility and utility of adopting a high-throughput model for RfMRI, commensurate with the scale used by human genetics studies
to have the power to detect both single gene and combinatorial
genetic and environmental effects on complex phenotypes.
Accordingly, the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project was
formed to aggregate existing R-fMRI data from collaborating centers throughout the world and to provide an initial demonstration of
the ability to pool functional data across centers. As of December
11, 2009, the repository includes data from 1,414 healthy adult
participants contributed by 35 laboratories (Table S1). The intent is
to expand this open resource as additional data are made available.
Here we provide an initial demonstration of the feasibility of
pooling R-fMRI datasets across centers. Speciﬁcally, we (i)
establish the presence of a universal functional architecture in
the brain, consistently detectable across centers; (ii) investigate
the inﬂuence of center on R-fMRI measures; (iii) explore the
potential impact of demographic variables (e.g., age, sex) on RfMRI measures; and (iv) demonstrate the use of an intersubject
variance–based method for identifying putative boundaries
between functional networks.

NEUROSCIENCE

onstrated by the 1000 Genomes Project (1), the accumulation
and sharing of large-scale datasets for data mining is necessary
for the ﬁrst phase of discovery science.
Although the neuroimaging community has traditionally focused
on hypothesis-driven task-based approaches, resting-state functional MRI (R-fMRI) has recently emerged as a powerful tool for
discovery science. Imaging the brain during rest reveals largeamplitude spontaneous low-frequency (<0.1 Hz) ﬂuctuations in the
fMRI signal that are temporally correlated across functionally
related areas (2–5). A single R-fMRI scan (as brief as 5 min) can be
used to interrogate a multitude of functional circuits simultaneously, without the requirement of selecting a priori hypotheses
(6). Building on the term “connectome,” coined to describe the
comprehensive map of structural connections in the human brain
(7), we use “functional connectome” to describe the collective set of
functional connections in the human brain.
Buttressed by moderate to high test–retest reliability (8–10) and
replicability (11, 12), as well as widespread access, R-fMRI has
overcome initial skepticism (13) regarding the validity of examining
such an apparently unconstrained state (5, 8, 14). Recent R-fMRI
studies have identiﬁed putative biomarkers of neuropsychiatric
illness (12, 15–18), provided insight into the development of functional networks in the maturing and aging brain (19–22), demonstrated a shared intrinsic functional architecture (23) between

Fig. 1. Independent center-, age-, and sex-related variations detected in R-fMRI measures of functional connectivity and amplitude ﬂuctuation. The ﬁrst row
depicts group-level maps for representative seed-based (column 1) and ICA-based (column 3) functional connectivity analyses (SI Results), as well as fALFF
(column 2). Group-level maps were derived from one-way ANOVA across 1,093 participants from 24 centers (factor: center; covariates: age and sex). All grouplevel maps depicted were corrected for multiple comparisons at the cluster level using Gaussian random-ﬁeld theory (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05, corrected). For each
measure, the second row shows robust between-center concordances (Kendall’s W), with the voxelwise coefﬁcients of variation above the diagonal and the
voxelwise means below the diagonal. Kendall’s W concordance between any two centers was calculated across all voxels in the brain mask for the mean (or
coefﬁcient of variation) connectivity map across all participants included in each center. Rows 3, 4, and 5 depict voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center,
age, and sex, respectively, as detected by one-way ANOVA. “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity (or amplitude, i.e., fALFF) in males; similarly,
“female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity (or amplitude) in females. “Older” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or amplitude) with
increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or amplitude) with decreasing age. “Pos” refers to positive functional
connectivity, and “neg” refers to negative functional connectivity. The PCC seed region is indicated by a white dot. (Top Left) Surface map legend: LL, left
lateral; RL, right lateral; LM, left medial; RM, right medial. All surface maps are rendered on the PALS-B12 atlas in CARET (http://brainvis.wustl.edu).

Biswal et al.

PNAS | March 9, 2010 | vol. 107 | no. 10 | 4735

Results
We applied three distinct analytic methods commonly used in the
R-fMRI literature: seed-based functional connectivity, independent component analysis (ICA), and frequency-domain
analyses. Across the three approaches, we found evidence of (i) a
universal intrinsic functional architecture in the human brain, (ii)
center-related variation in R-fMRI measures, and (iii) consistent
effects of age and sex on R-fMRI measures, detectable across
centers despite the presence of center-related variability (Fig. 1).
Speciﬁcally, seed-based correlational analyses revealed highly
consistent patterns of functional connectivity across centers for
both the “default mode” (30) and “task-positive” networks (31),
supporting a universal functional architecture (Fig. S1). Similarly,
a data-driven, temporal concatenation ICA approach, combined
with dual regression (32–34), revealed consistent patterns of
functional connectivity across centers for 20 spatially independent
functional networks (Fig. 1 and Figs. S2 and S3). In addition, for
each of the functional connectivity measures, within-center
coefﬁcient of variation maps showed a high degree of concordance across centers (Fig. S4). This suggests that common loci
of variation exist: centers demonstrated a high degree of agreement on which connections are characterized by relative variance
or invariance. Despite the high degree of concordance between
centers, there were appreciable center-related variations in the
strength of functional connectivity throughout the brain (8). The
effect of center was especially prominent in regions exhibiting
greater interregional connection strength, because these have the
least within-center variability (See SI Results and Fig. S5 for further discussion of center-related variability.) However, even when
taking this center-related variability into account, robustly reliable
effects of age and sex remained appreciable (Fig. 2 and Figs. S1
and S2). (See SI Results and Fig. S6 for an examination of the
impact of sample size on effects of age and sex.)
The detection of sex differences was particularly noteworthy,
because these differences are rarely appreciated in the R-fMRI

literature (35). Sexual dimorphism in human genomic expression
(36) is known to affect numerous physiological variables that can
inﬂuence the fMRI signal (37, 38). For example, males and
females differ in terms of hemoglobin concentrations and hematocrit (39). However, global variables such as these do not explain
the regionally speciﬁc sex-related phenomenon noted in the
present work. Hormonal effects (e.g., estrogen), operating both
during brain development (40) and acutely (41), are known to
have regional speciﬁcity (42), making them potential contributors
to the differences observed. Given the discovery nature of the
present work and the lack of prior coordination among centers,
the speciﬁc sex differences that we observed should be interpreted
with caution until replicated in an independent sample.
Along with examining patterns of functional connectivity, we
measured the amplitude of low-frequency ﬂuctuations at each
voxel using two common periodogram-based measures: amplitude of low frequency ﬂuctuation (ALFF; total power <0.1 Hz) (2,
17, 43) and fractional ALFF (fALFF; total power <0.1 Hz/total
power in the measured spectrum) (44). Concordant with previous
work, the dominance of low-frequency ﬂuctuations was consistently noted within gray matter regions, but not white matter
(44). As with our analyses of functional connectivity, despite clear
evidence of center-related effects, we were again able to demonstrate age- and sex-related differences in the magnitude of lowfrequency ﬂuctuations in various regions, particularly medial wall
structures (Fig. 2 and Fig. S7).
Beyond data pooling for statistical analyses, we demonstrate
the potential to use high-throughput datasets to develop normative maps of functional systems in the brain, which is a prerequisite for clinical applications. Speciﬁcally, we exploit a key
property of functional connectivity maps, the presence of welldifferentiated borders between functionally distinct regions (45).
The voxelwise measures of coefﬁcients of variation for each type
of functional connectivity map delineate putative functional
boundaries based on the presence of marked variability in func-

Fig. 2. Illustrative areas exhibiting age- and sex-related variation in R-fMRI properties. Signiﬁcant group-level variance in functional connectivity maps was
explained by age and sex (cluster-based Gaussian random-ﬁeld corrected: Z > 2.3; P < 0.05). For each of three methods (seed-based, fALFF, and ICA), variance
in connectivity strength explained by age (Left) and sex (Right) is illustrated both anatomically and graphically. Age-related differences are represented as
scatterplots. Sex-related differences are represented as histograms depicting the distributions of resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) values for males
and females separately. Vertical lines indicate peak values. Corresponding topographical brain areas are indicated with dots. “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly
greater connectivity (or amplitude, i.e., fALFF) in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity (or amplitude) in females. “Older”
refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or amplitude) with increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity (or
amplitude) with decreasing age.

4736 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0911855107

Biswal et al.

tional connectivity across participants. The variation observed at
these boundaries stands in contrast to the low degree of variability
observed in regions exhibiting consistently positive or negative
connectivity (Fig. 3). In addition, examination of the coefﬁcients
of variation for fALFF measures revealed sharp boundary zones
between white matter and gray matter. It also identiﬁed areas of
variability in the amplitude of spontaneous ﬂuctuations that
coincided with anatomic areas of notable sulcal variability (e.g.,
cingulate and frontal opercular regions).

NEUROSCIENCE

Discussion
The present work represents a watershed event in functional
imaging: demonstration of the feasibility of sharing and pooling
functional data across multiple centers, alongside the establishment of an open-access data repository. We have demonstrated (i)
the presence of a universal functional architecture, with remarkable stability in the functional connectome and its loci of variation
across participants and centers; (ii) evidence of systematic sex
differences in R-fMRI measures, as well as age-related gradients
even in middle adulthood; and (iii) a method for highlighting the
complex array of putative functional boundaries between networks from which normative maps can be developed. Future work
should focus on using the functional connectome to catalog phenotypic diversity in brain–behavior relationships.
Functional connectivity is both related to and distinct from anatomic connectivity. Speciﬁcally, a recent study reported that a
structural core appears to play “a central role in integrating information across functionally segregated brain regions” (23). As such,
our ﬁnding of a universal functional architecture was not unexpected. But structure and function are not completely coupled, as
illustrated by the robust homotopic (i.e., contralateral) functional
connectivity for such regions as the primary visual cortex or the
amygdala, both of which lack direct callosal projections (24, 46).
Such ﬁndings imply that functional connectivity is subserved by
polysynaptic as well as monosynaptic anatomic circuits. In addition,
functional connectivity exhibits dynamic properties that are absent

in structural connectivity. For instance, functional connectivity is
modulated by cognitive (47) and emotional state (48), arousal, and
sleep (26), whereas structural connectivity is grossly unaffected by
such factors. In short, the presence of a demonstrable structural
connection does not necessitate that of a functional connection, nor
does the demonstration of a functional connection imply the presence of a direct structural connection.
Task-based fMRI and R-fMRI approaches have complementary roles in the study of human brain function. Task-based
approaches require sufﬁcient a priori knowledge to articulate
speciﬁc hypotheses, and they are invaluable in reﬁning such
hypotheses. But when the knowledge base is insufﬁcient, taskbased approaches may be compared to candidate gene studies,
which have had limited success when applied to complex genetic
disorders. In contrast, genome-wide association studies are
increasingly providing initial ﬁndings for complex traits (49) and
diseases that are subsequently validated through replication,
extension, and deep sequencing (50). Our demonstration that RfMRI data can be aggregated and pooled, and that variability
among individuals can be explained in terms of speciﬁc subject
variables (e.g., sex, age), suggests that this approach can provide
quantitative phenotypes to be integrated into molecular studies.
Our results must be considered in light of several limitations of
the present study. First, we used a convenience sample comprising previously collected data from an array of centers, without prior coordination of acquisition parameters or scanning
conditions. Although the robustness of our results attests to the
consistency of intrinsic brain activity, it still represents a potential
underestimate of the true across-center consistency. Our demographic data warrant caution, because centers were heterogeneous with respect to male:female ratio, mean age, and age
range. Our ﬁndings should motivate more systematic exploration
of these variables, because future high-throughput imaging
studies will need to take such factors into account.
Despite the promise of R-fMRI, some theoretical and pragmatic
issues need to be addressed. Examples include the determination of

Fig. 3. Variation across individuals reveals functional boundaries. Previous work has noted that functionally segregated regions are frequently characterized
by well-demarcated boundaries for an individual (45). As such, variability in boundary areas is detectable across participants. Here we detect functional
boundaries via examination of voxelwise coefﬁcients of variation (absolute value) for fALFF and selected seed-based [intraparietal sulcus (IPS), posterior
cingulate/precuneus (PCC)] and ICA-based (IC13) functional connectivity maps. For the purpose of visualization, coefﬁcients of variation were rank-ordered,
whereby the relative degree of variation across participants at a given voxel, rather than the actual value, was plotted to better contrast brain regions.
Ranking coefﬁcients of variation efﬁciently identiﬁed regions of greatest interindividual variability, thus delineating putative functional boundaries.

Biswal et al.

PNAS | March 9, 2010 | vol. 107 | no. 10 | 4737

the origins and biological signiﬁcance of spontaneous low-frequency
ﬂuctuations of neuronal and hemodynamic activity, the impact of
intrinsic activity on evoked responses (and vice versa), and the ideal
means of acquiring, processing, and analyzing R-fMRI data. Nevertheless, the potential of discovery science is vast, from the development of objective measures of brain functional integrity to help
guide clinical diagnoses and decision-making, to tracking treatment
response and assessing the efﬁcacy of treatment interventions.
Finally, whereas the present work examines functional connectivity
alone, future studies may combine R-fMRI with other modalities (e.
g., EEG, magnetoencephalography, diffusion-tensor imaging,
volumetrics) and genetics to achieve a more complete understanding of the human brain.
All data and analytic tools used in the present work will be made
available at www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/. We anticipate that
the open availability of the 1000 Functional Connectomes dataset will
recruit the broad participation and collaboration among the scientiﬁc
community necessary for successful implementation of discoverybased science of human brain function. In addition, we hope that it
will further advance the ethos of data sharing and collaboration initiated by such efforts as fMRIDC (www.fmridc.org), FBIRN (www.
birncommunity.org), OASIS (www.oasis-brains.org), BrainScape
(www.brainscape.org), and BrainMap (www.brainmap.org).

concatenation to generate group-level components and dual regression to
generate individual participant maps. For amplitude measures at each voxel, we
used the FFT-based ALFF (2, 17, 43) and its normalized variant, fALFF (44).
Standard image preprocessing was performed (i.e., motion correction,
spatial ﬁltering with FWHM = 6 mm, 12-dof afﬁne transformation to MNI152
stereotactic space). For seed-based correlation approaches and dual regression following ICA analysis, nuisance signals (e.g., global signal, WM, CSF,
motion parameters) were regressed out. Temporal ﬁltering was tailored for
each analytic approach (29, 31, 32, 44).
ICA components for dual regression analyses were determined by (i) lowdimensional (20 components) temporal concatenation ICA carried out 25 times
(each with 18 participants randomly selected from each of 17 centers with
minimum of 165 time points) and (ii) low-dimensional (20 components) metaICA, a second concatenation-based ICA using the component sets produced by
the 25 runs (see SI Results for a description of an alternative method). For each
participant, dual regression (32–34) was performed using the 20 components
identiﬁed by the meta-ICA (Fig. S3), yielding a connectivity map for each
component.
Aggregate statistical analyses of center, sex, and age effects were based on
a generalized linear model implementation of one-way ANOVA (factor:
center; covariates: age and sex). To identify functional boundaries, we calculated voxelwise coefﬁcients of variation across all 1,093 participants, and
ranked each voxel based on the absolute value of its coefﬁcient of variation.

Resting-state fMRI scans were aggregated from 35 community-based datasets
(n = 1,414). The present analysis was restricted to 24 centers (n = 1,093; 21
published, 3 unpublished; mean age <60 years; only participants over age 18;
one scan per participant; duration: 2.2–20 min; n = 970 at 3 T, n = 123 at 1.5 T;
voxel size, 1.5–5mm within plane; slice thickness, 3–8 mm). Each contributor’s
respective ethics committee approved submission of deidentiﬁed data. The
institutional review boards of NYU Langone Medical Center and New Jersey
Medical School approved the receipt and dissemination of the data.
For functional connectivity, we used seed-based correlation analysis, based on
six previously identiﬁed seed regions (31), and model-free ICA, using temporal

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank David Kennedy and www.nitrc.org for supporting the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project data release, Avi Snyder for
providing helpful insights and advice concerning project goals, and Cameron
Craddock for helpful advice on this study. Financial support for the 1000
Functional Connectomes project was provided by grants from the National
Institutes of Mental Health (R01MH083246 and R01MH081218 to F.X.C. and
M.P.M.), National Institute on Drug Abuse (R03DA024775, to C.K.;
R01DA016979, to F.X.C.), Autism Speaks, National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke (R01NS049176, to B.B.), and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute (to J.S.A. and R.L.B.), as well as gifts to the NYU Child Study Center
from the Stavros Niarchos Foundation, Leon Levy Foundation, Joseph P.
Healy, Linda and Richard Schaps, and Jill and Bob Smith and an endowment
provided by Phyllis Green and Randolph Cōwen. NITRC is funded by the
National Institutes of Health’s Blueprint for Neurosciences Research (neuroscienceblueprint.nih.gov) (Contract N02-EB-6-4281, to TCG, Inc.).

1. Wise J (2008) Consortium hopes to sequence genome of 1000 volunteers. BMJ 336:
237.
2. Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS (1995) Functional connectivity in the
motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn Reson Med 34:
537–541.
3. Fox MD, Raichle ME (2007) Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed with
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:700–711.
4. Margulies DS, et al. (2007) Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate
cortex. Neuroimage 37:579–588.
5. Smith SM, et al. (2009) Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during
activation and rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:13040–13045.
6. Van Dijk KR, et al. (2010) Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human
connectomics: Theory, properties, and optimization. J Neurophysiol 103:297–321.
7. Sporns O, Tononi G, Kötter R (2005) The human connectome: A structural description
of the human brain. PLOS Comput Biol 1:e42.
8. Shehzad Z, et al. (2009) The resting brain: Unconstrained yet reliable. Cereb Cortex 19:
2209–2229.
9. Zuo XN, et al. (2010) Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-restest evaluation
using ICA and dual regression approach. Neuroimage 49:2163–2177.
10. Zuo XN, et al. (2010) The oscillating brain: Complex and reliable. Neuroimage 49:
1432–1445.
11. He Y, et al. (2009) Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain
activity in humans. PLoS One 4:e5226.
12. Buckner RL, et al. (2009) Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity:
Mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 29:
1860–1873.
13. Morcom AM, Fletcher PC (2007) Does the brain have a baseline? Why we should be
resisting a rest. Neuroimage 37:1073–1082.
14. Damoiseaux JS, et al. (2006) Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:13848–13853.
15. Castellanos FX, et al. (2008) Cingulate precuneus interactions: A new locus of
dysfunction in adult attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 63:
332–337.
16. Church JA, et al. (2009) Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome show
immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity. Brain 132:225–238.
17. Zang YF, et al. (2007) Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed
by resting-state functional MRI. Brain Dev 29:83–91.
18. Rombouts SA, et al. (2009) Model-free group analysis shows altered BOLD FMRI
networks in dementia. Hum Brain Mapp 30:256–266.

19. Kelly AMC, et al. (2009) Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity
from late childhood to early adulthood. Cereb Cortex 19:640–657.
20. Supekar K, Musen M, Menon V (2009) Development of large-scale functional brain
networks in children. PLoS Biol 7:e1000157.
21. Fair DA, et al. (2009) Functional brain networks develop from a “local to distributed”
organization. PLoS Comput Biol 5:e1000381.
22. Andrews-Hanna JR, et al. (2007) Disruption of large-scale brain systems in advanced
aging. Neuron 56:924–935.
23. Hagmann P, et al. (2008) Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS
Biol 6:e159.
24. Vincent JL, et al. (2007) Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey
brain. Nature 447:83–86.
25. Margulies DS, et al. (2009) Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in
humans and monkeys. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:20069–20074.
26. Fukunaga M, et al. (2006) Large-amplitude, spatially correlated ﬂuctuations in BOLD
fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep stages. Magn Reson Imaging 24:
979–992.
27. Greicius MD, et al. (2008) Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light
sedation. Hum Brain Mapp 29:839–847.
28. Achard S, Bullmore E (2007) Efﬁciency and cost of economical brain functional
networks. PLoS Comput Biol 3:e17.
29. Kelly C, et al. (2009) L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and
motor networks: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Neurosci 29:7364–7378.
30. Gusnard DA, Raichle ME, Raichle ME (2001) Searching for a baseline: Functional
imaging and the resting human brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:685–694.
31. Fox MD, et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9673–9678.
32. Beckmann CF, DeLuca M, Devlin JT, Smith SM (2005) Investigations into resting-state
connectivity using independent component analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
360:1001–1013.
33. Filippini N, et al. (2009) Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the
APOE-epsilon4 allele. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:7209–7214.
34. Calhoun VD, Pekar JJ, Pearlson GD (2004) Alcohol intoxication effects on simulated
driving: Exploring alcohol-dose effects on brain activation using functional MRI.
Neuropsychopharmacology 29:2097–3017.
35. Liu H, Stufﬂebeam SM, Sepulcre J, Hedden T, Buckner RL (2009) Evidence from
intrinsic activity that asymmetry of the human brain is controlled by multiple factors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:20499–20503.
36. Ellegren H, Parsch J (2007) The evolution of sex-biased genes and sex-biased gene
expression. Nat Rev Genet 8:689–698.

Methods

4738 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0911855107

Biswal et al.

44. Zou QH, et al. (2008) An improved approach to detection of amplitude of lowfrequency ﬂuctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: Fractional ALFF. J Neurosci
Methods 172:137–141.
45. Cohen AL, et al. (2008) Deﬁning functional areas in individual human brains using
resting functional connectivity MRI. Neuroimage 41:45–57.
46. Roy AK, et al. (2009) Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using restingstate fMRI. Neuroimage 45:614–626.
47. Albert NB, Robertson EM, Miall RC (2009) The resting human brain and motor
learning. Curr Biol 19:1023–1027.
48. Harrison BJ, et al. (2008) Modulation of brain resting-state networks by sad mood
induction. PLoS ONE 3:e1794.
49. Lettre G (2009) Genetic regulation of adult stature. Curr Opin Pediatr 21:515–522.
50. Manolio TA, et al. (2009) Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases. Nature
461:747–753.

NEUROSCIENCE

37. Goldstein JM, et al. (2001) Normal sexual dimorphism of the adult human brain
assessed by in vivo magnetic resonance imaging. Cereb Cortex 11:490–497.
38. Gur RC, et al. (1995) Sex differences in regional cerebral glucose metabolism during a
resting state. Science 267:528–531.
39. Zeng SM, Yankowitz J, Widness JA, Strauss RG (2001) Etiology of differences in hematocrit
between males and females: Sequence-based polymorphisms in erythropoietin and its
receptor. J Gend Specif Med 4:35–40.
40. Lenroot RK, et al. (2007) Sexual dimorphism of brain developmental trajectories
during childhood and adolescence. Neuroimage 36:1065–1073.
41. Protopopescu X, et al. (2008) Hippocampal structural changes across the menstrual
cycle. Hippocampus 18:985–988.
42. McEwen BS (1999) Permanence of brain sex differences and structural plasticity of the
adult brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:7128–7130.
43. Cordes D, et al. (2001) Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the
cerebral cortex in “resting-state” data. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:1326–1333.

Biswal et al.

PNAS | March 9, 2010 | vol. 107 | no. 10 | 4739

Supporting Information
Biswal et al. 10.1073/pnas.0911855107
SI Methods
Image Preprocessing. Overview. All available resting-state scans were

preprocessed using both AFNI (1) and FSL (www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk).
Speciﬁc commands can be found in the preprocessing scripts that
will be released at www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/ on publication of this paper. After the ﬁrst ﬁve time points of every scan
were discarded, to remove possible T1 stabilization effects, the
data were corrected for motion by aligning each volume to the
mean image volume using Fourier interpolation in AFNI. Then
the data were spatially smoothed using a 6-mm FWHM Gaussian
kernel. Mean-based intensity normalization was done by scaling all
volumes by the same factor (10,000).
Seed-based correlation analyses. The data were temporally ﬁltered
using both a high-pass (Gaussian-weighted least squares straightline ﬁtting, with σ = 100.0 s) and low-pass (Gaussian low-pass
temporal ﬁltering, with a HWHM of 2.8 s) ﬁlter, followed by
linear detrending to remove any residual drift.
Independent component analysis. Temporal concatenation group analysis.

Consistent with common practice, temporal ﬁltering for ICA
analyses was limited to high-pass ﬁltering (Gaussian-weighted least
squares straight-line ﬁtting, with σ = 100.0 s).
Dual regression. This step used the same preprocessed data as used
in the seed-based correlation analyses.
ALFF/fALFF. No temporal ﬁltering was carried out, because the data
were examined in the frequency domain within select bands (2, 3).
Temporal despiking with a hyperbolic tangent squashing function
was performed, however, to limit extreme values. Linear trends
were then removed from the data.
Registration and normalization. After the skull was removed using
AFNI, registration of each individual’s high-resolution anatomic
image to a common stereotactic space [the Montreal Neurological
Institute’s 152-brain template (MNI152); 3 mm isotropic voxel size]
was done using a 12–degrees of freedom linear afﬁne transformation (FLIRT) (4, 5). The resulting transformation was then
applied to each individual’s functional dataset. We did not further
optimize the normalization with a nonlinear algorithm, because of
concerns about image quality and limited coverage in some datasets.
Functional Connectivity: Seed-Based Correlation Analysis. Nuisance
signal regression. Consistent with common practice in the R-

fMRI literature, nuisance signals were removed from the data via
multiple regression before functional connectivity analyses were
performed. This step is designed to control for the effects of
physiological processes, such as ﬂuctuations related to motion and
cardiac and respiratory cycles. Speciﬁcally, each individual’s 4D
time series data were regressed on nine predictors: white matter
(WM), cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), the global signal, and six motion
parameters. The global signal regressor was generated by averaging across the time series of all voxels in the brain. The WM and
CSF covariates were generated by segmenting each individual’s
high-resolution structural image (using FAST in FSL). The resulting segmented WM and CSF images were thresholded to
ensure 80% tissue type probability. These thresholded masks were
then applied to each individual’s time series, and a mean time
series was calculated by averaging across time series of all voxels
within each mask. The six motion parameters were calculated in
the motion-correction step during preprocessing. Movement in
each of the three cardinal directions (X, Y, and Z) and rotational
movement around three axes (pitch, yaw, and roll) were included
for each individual.
Seed selection. Six 7.5-mm-radius seed regions of interest (ROIs)
(containing 33 voxels) centered on the coordinates previously used
Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

by Fox et al. (6) were created to examine functional connectivity
for each of six regions, three regions within the “task-positive”
network and three within the “default mode” network. The ROIs
within the task-positive network were located in the IPS (-25, -57,
46), the middle temporal region (MT+; -45, -69, -2), and the right
frontal eye ﬁeld (FEF) region of the precentral sulcus (25, -13,
50). The default mode network seed ROIs were located in the left
lateral parietal cortex (LP; -45, -67, 36), medial prefrontal cortex
(MPF; -1, 47, -4), and PCC (-5, -49, 40).
Individual seed-based functional connectivity analysis. First, each individual’s residual 4D time series data were spatially normalized by
applying the previously computed transformation to the MNI152
standard space. Then the time series for each seed was extracted
from these data. Time series were averaged across all voxels in
each seed’s ROI. For each individual dataset, the correlation
between the time series of the seed ROI and that of each voxel in
the brain was determined. This analysis was implemented using
3dﬁm+ (AFNI) to produce individual-level correlation maps of
all voxels that were positively or negatively correlated with the
seed’s time series. Finally, these individual-level correlation maps
were converted to Z-value maps using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation.
Functional Connectivity: Independent Component Analysis. Overview.

Temporal-concatenation group ICA (TC-GICA) was used to
generate group-level components for the dataset (7) using MELODIC (FSL). Given computational resource limitations (e.g., 32
GB of physical memory), as well as a number of centers with a
small number of time points due to repetition times >2.0 s, each
TC-GICA run was applied to a dataset consisting of 18 participants/center from the 17 centers that collected a minimum of 165
functional volumes per scan. This approach also ensured that a
single center’s data would not drive the ICA components detected. Consistent with recent work on low-dimensional ICA (8),
the number of components was ﬁxed at 20. Given the potential for
such factors as initial random values and subject sampling to affect
ICA results, 25 TC-GICA analyses were performed, each using a
unique resampling from each of the 17 centers. A meta-ICA
analysis was then carried out across the 25 runs to extract the 20
spatially independent components consistently identiﬁed across
the 25 runs. An alternative hierarchical clustering approach based
on ICASSO (9) is described below. The two approaches yielded
similar results. Dual regression (10, 11) was then carried out using
the 20 resulting components as templates, to produce individual
participant maps for each of the 20 components.
TC-GICA. Speciﬁcally, TC-GICA comprised ﬁve fundamental steps:
1. Each individual’s preprocessed data were ﬁrst truncated to
the same number of time points (i.e., 165 EPI volumes).
2. A bootstrapping dataset was generated by randomly choosing 18 individual datasets per center, resulting in 306 individual functional datasets.
3. All 306 individual functional datasets were spatially averaged in MNI152 standard space and then used to estimate
the mean covariance matrix.
4. The number of components was set at 20, and all individual
functional data were projected into a subspace spanned by
the ﬁrst 20 eigenvectors of the mean covariance matrix,
resulting in reduced individual fMRI data (in a common
subspace).
1 of 10

5. All 306 reduced individual datasets were temporally concatenated, reduced via principal component analysis to 20
dimensions, and fed into the probabilistic ICA algorithm
with a random initial value (12).
This procedure produced 20 group-level components for each
TC-GICA run. Finally, 500 (20 × 25) group-level components
were generated from the 25 TC-GICA runs.
Generation of component templates for dual regression (meta-ICA). To
provide more accurate and robust ICA component templates, we
carried out another low-dimensional (20 components) TC-GICA.
Here we concatenated the 500 components produced by the 25
TC-GICA runs as the input data of a single-session ICA in
MELODIC. The resultant maps were used as ﬁnal component
templates for the dual regression procedure. Of note, this method
was selected as the primary approach over the alternative
approach described because it guarantees the spatial independence of the 20 components, whereas the alternative approach
does not.
Generation of component templates for dual regression model (alternative
approach). To emphasize the robustness of the ﬁndings of the meta-

ICA, here we describe an alternative approach that yields nearly
identical components to the meta-ICA. The ﬁndings of the two
approaches differed notably for only one of the 20 components,
for which the meta-ICA ﬁnding was more plausible. Given the
high degree of similarity between the two methods, we present
only the ﬁndings from the meta-ICA in the present work. In the
alternative approach, we used the hierarchical clustering algorithm implemented in the ICASSO toolbox (9). ICASSO was
designed for validating the robustness of ICA with respect to
random initial values (of the ICA mixing matrix) and the ICA
cost function optimization search strategy. However, due to
limitations in computational resources (e.g., 32 GB of memory in
the present work), TC-GICA cannot be carried out on the full
datasets. Thus, we used the bootstrapping approach described
above with 25 ICA analyses, in which initial values and the
speciﬁc participants selected from each center varied from one
ICA analysis to the next. Here the 500 group-level components
(20 components per run × 25 runs) were sorted using hierarchical clustering. The number of clusters (20) was selected to
match the number of components. The similarity between
components was measured by the combination of both spatial Rs
and temporal Rt correlations in Eq. (1) and the distance between
components as deﬁned in Eq. (2) (13):
Sði; jÞ ¼ λ∗ Rs ði; jÞ þ ð1 − λÞ∗ Rt ði; jÞ
Dði; jÞ ¼

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 − Sði; jÞ; 1≤i; j≤500

(1)
(2)

Considering the spatial ICA, λ =0.8 was chosen in our clustering
procedure. Finally, the median value at each voxel for each of
the 20 clusters was calculated to determine the ﬁnal component
templates for the dual regression procedure.
Individual component reconstruction via the dual regression model. To
reconstruct component maps for each participant, the recently
developed dual regression procedure (11, 14) was applied to each
of the 1,093 individual participants’ datasets. Speciﬁcally, in the
present work, dual regression consisted of two linear regressions
carried out independently for each of the 20 component maps
identiﬁed in temporal concatenation ICA. For each component
template, the ﬁrst regression model used the template as a
spatial predictor for the participant’s 4D data, producing a set of
individual regression weights in the time domain (i.e., a time
series for each spatial map). Using this time series as a temporal
predictor for the 4D BOLD data, the second regression equation
estimated the individual regression weights in the spatial domain
(i.e., the participant-level individual spatial map). Both regressions used the same data set used for the seed-based conBiswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

nectivity approaches, that is, each participant’s 4D dataset after
removal of the nine nuisance covariates. Component time series
were demeaned in both regressions, but no variance normalization was used. The dual regression procedure was carried out
for all 1,093 participants included across 24 centers, not just
those used for the generation of ICA-based templates. For each
component, these individual spatial maps were then used to
evaluate group-level statistics.
Amplitude of spontaneous low-frequency ﬂuctuations. To examine the
potentially meaningful information contained within the ALFF,
two fast-Fourier transformation (FFT)-based indices, ALFF and
fALFF, were used to compute the amplitude of low-frequency
ﬂuctuations in the frequency domain (2, 3, 15). For each individual,
ALFF and fALFF were computed to identify those voxels with
signiﬁcantly detectable low-frequency ﬂuctuation amplitudes.
Speciﬁcally, at each voxel, ALFF is calculated as the sum of amplitudes within a speciﬁc low frequency range (0.01–0.1 Hz).
fALFF is the normalized ALFF, calculated by dividing the ALFF
value by the total sum of amplitudes across the entire frequency
range measured in a given time series. Voxelwise ALFF and
fALFF maps were calculated for each participant in native space,
and then transformed into the MNI152 standard brain space with
3-mm isotropic voxel size. Before statistical analyses, each individual ALFF or fALFF map was Z-transformed (i.e., by subtracting the mean voxelwise ALFF or fALFF obtained for the
individual’s entire brain, and then dividing by the corresponding
SD) to improve its suitability for group-level parametric analyses.
The individual Z-transformed ALFF or fALFF maps were used in
subsequent group- and center-level analyses.
Uniﬁed group-level statistical model. For all three types of R-fMRI
measures (seed-based correlations, ICA, and ALFF/fALFF), a
uniﬁed general linear model frame was developed for center-level
statistical analyses. The uniﬁed statistical model is a one-way
ANOVA, treating centers as the between factor. F-contrasts were
used to measure the effect of centers. Overall group mean
contrasts across all centers were modeled as well. Speciﬁcally, a
one-factor 24-level ANOVA (factor: center; 1,093 participants),
with age and sex as covariates, was used to examine the effects of
age, sex, and center on the three R-fMRI measures. Multiple
comparisons were corrected at the cluster level using Gaussian
random ﬁeld theory (min Z > 2.3; cluster signiﬁcance: P < 0.05,
corrected).
SI Results
Center-Related Variability. The results presented in Fig. 1 show that
the effects ascribable to center can be either interpreted as negligible, as indicated by the high between-center Kendall’s W (row 2),
or substantial, accounting for much of the variance (row 3). These
opposite interpretations are not mutually exclusive. The high between-center Kendall’s W indicates that the resting-state measures
(i.e., functional connectivity, ﬂuctuation amplitude) obtained from
different centers have a high degree of similarity. Nevertheless,
systematic differences exist between centers, and these are easily
quantiﬁed by ANOVA. In Fig. S5 for each center, the mean functional connectivity across 40 peak voxels derived from the center
effect map for the PCC seed is depicted. As the ﬁgure shows, there
are between-center differences in the height of the functional connectivity values. Some centers have overall higher functional connectivity values than others; these differences in the height of
functional connectivity values drive the signiﬁcant between-center
effects. The variability in functional connectivity values could be
related to a number of factors (e.g., the speciﬁc scanner used,
scanner sequence, sample characteristics, speciﬁc instructions to
participants, degree of variability in participant wakefulness). Because there was no previous coordination among centers regarding
scanning parameters, each of these parameters could contribute to
across-center differences. Speciﬁc examination of these factors is
beyond the scope of the present work, but we anticipate that it will be
2 of 10

Effect of Sample Size on the Relationship Between RSFC and Age. We
investigated the effect of sample size on the strength of the correlation between RSFC and age in two regions identiﬁed by our group
analyses. For this purpose, we randomly sampled participants from
the entire study sample using subgroups of 10–1,090 individuals (of
the total 1,093 participants), then calculated the correlation be-

tween age and connectivity strength for each subgroup. We repeated this procedure 10,000 times to optimize randomization.
Finally, we calculated the mean correlation and SD across the
10,000 iterations. As shown in Fig. S6, the variability in the observed
correlation naturally decreased as a function of sample size, with a
tipping point observed when samples exceeded ∼100–200 participants. This suggests that results obtained with sample sizes that
have been presumed to be sufﬁcient (e.g., 50 participants) are likely
to lead to false-negative results for small effects.

1. Cox RW (1996) AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic
resonance neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res 29:162–173.
2. Zang YF, et al. (2007) Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD revealed
by resting-state functional MRI. Brain Dev 29:83–91.
3. Zou QH, et al. (2008) An improved approach to detection of amplitude of lowfrequency ﬂuctuation (ALFF) for resting-state fMRI: Fractional ALFF. J Neurosci
Methods 172:137–141.
4. Jenkinson M, Smith S (2001) A global optimisation method for robust afﬁne
registration of brain images. Med Image Anal 5:143–156.
5. Jenkinson M, Bannister P, Brady M, Smith S (2002) Improved optimization for the
robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images.
Neuroimage 17:825–841.
6. Fox MD, et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9673–9678.
7. Beckmann CF, DeLuca M, Devlin JT, Smith SM (2005) Investigations into resting-state
connectivity using independent component analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
360:1001–1013.

8. Smith SM, et al. (2009) Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during
activation and rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:13040–13045.
9. Himberg J, Hyvärinen A, Esposito F (2004) Validating the independent components of
neuroimaging time series via clustering and visualization. Neuroimage 22:1214–1222.
10. Filippini N, et al. (2009) Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the
APOE-epsilon4 allele. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:7209–7214.
11. Calhoun VD, Pekar JJ, Pearlson GD (2004) Alcohol intoxication effects on simulated
driving: Exploring alcohol-dose effects on brain activation using functional MRI.
Neuropsychopharmacology 29:2097–3017.
12. Beckmann CF, Smith SM (2004) Probabilistic independent component analysis for
functional magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 23:137–152.
13. Esposito F, et al. (2005) Independent component analysis of fMRI group studies by
self-organizing clustering. Neuroimage 25:193–205.
14. Filippini N, et al. (2009) Regional atrophy of transcallosal prefrontal connections in
cognitively normal APOE epsilon4 carriers. J Magn Reson Imaging 29:1021–1026.
15. Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS (1995) Functional connectivity in the motor
cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn Reson Med 34:537–541.

the focus of future studies. Fortunately, as demonstrated by our
analyses, these sources of variation did not preclude us from being
able to effectively pool data and carry out discovery-based analyses.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

3 of 10

Fig. S1. Center-, age-, and sex-related variations detected in R-fMRI measures of functional connectivity using seed-based correlation analyses. The ﬁrst
column depicts group-level functional connectivity maps for three representative “default mode” seeds (A) and three “task-positive” network seeds (B). The
seed ROIs are shown as white circles. The second column depicts voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center, as detected by one-way ANOVA (across 24
centers, including 1,093 participants). Columns 3 and 4 depict voxels exhibiting age- and sex-related variations (modeled as covariates). Center, sex, and age
ﬁndings were corrected for multiple comparisons (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05, corrected). All supplementary cortical surface maps are arrayed as shown in Fig. 1, with
lateral views in upper rows, medial views in lower rows, left hemisphere on the left, and right hemisphere on the right. “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater
connectivity in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in females. “Older” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with
increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with decreasing age. “Pos”, positive functional connectivity; “neg”, negative
functional connectivity.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

4 of 10

Fig. S2. Center-, age-, and sex-related differences detected in R-fMRI measures of functional connectivity combining independent component and dual regression analyses. The ﬁrst column depicts group-level maps for 20 functional connectivity ICs. For each component, the second column depicts voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center, as detected by one-way ANOVA (across 24 centers, including 1,093 participants). Columns 3 and 4 depict voxels exhibiting
age- and sex-related variations. Center, age and sex ﬁndings were corrected for multiple comparisons (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05, corrected). “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in females. “Older” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing
connectivity with increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with decreasing age. “Pos,” positive group effect: “neg,”
negative group effect.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

5 of 10

Fig. S3. IC templates used for dual regression analyses. Independent component maps resulting from the meta-ICA analysis shown on standard brain views (A)
and surface maps (B). Component maps were thresholded at P > 0.05 using spatial mixture modeling. Peak coordinates of each IC’s activity are displayed in the
lower right corner of each grid panel (MNI152 standard space).

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

6 of 10

Fig. S4. Consistency of R-fMRI measures across centers: ICA combined with dual regression (A), and seed-based correlation (B). For each center, the voxelwise mean and coefﬁcient of variation was calculated for each R-fMRI measure. The Kendall’s W concordance of the mean or coefﬁcient of variation maps
between any two centers was calculated. The coefﬁcient of variation is depicted above the diagonal, the mean below.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

7 of 10

Fig. S5. Functional connectivity values observed at peak locations of between-center differences. For each center we calculated the mean across a 3 mm
radius sphere centered at each of the 40 most signiﬁcant voxels indexing the effect of center for the PCC seed ROI (Fig. 1, column 1, row 3). Connectivity values
indexed the functional connectivity between the 3 mm radius sphere and the PCC seed ROI. All centers included in the analyses are shown (n = 24). Although
the strength of functional connectivity values observed across centers clearly varies, the within-center variability is relatively low. This indicates that the
differences in functional connectivity strength among centers are relatively stable across the brain. A center that shows higher functional connectivity in one
area of the brain compared with another center most likely also shows higher functional connectivity in other areas of the brain.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

8 of 10

Fig. S6. Effect of sample size on the correlation between age and RSFC. Shown is the mean correlation ± 2 SD across 10,000 calculations of the correlation
between age and functional connectivity strength as a function of sample size. For each of the two regions illustrating the effect of age for the PCC seed ROI in
Fig. 2, we calculated the correlation between age and RSFC as a function of sample size. We randomly sampled subgroups, ranging in size from 10 to 1,090
participants, from the total of 1,093 participants. We then calculated the correlation between age and RSFC for each of the subgroups. This procedure was
iterated 10,000 times to optimize randomization. (A) Mean correlation ± 2 times the SD across 10,000 iterations for the region illustrated in Fig. 2 that showed
a positive correlation between age and RSFC with the PCC seed. (B) Mean correlation ± 2 times the SD across the 10,000 iterations for the region illustrated in
Fig. 2 that showed a negative correlation between age and RSFC with the PCC seed. In each ﬁgure, the actually observed correlation is indicated on the y-axis in
a smaller font.

Fig. S7. Center-, age-, and sex-related variations in R-fMRI amplitude measures. The ﬁrst column depicts group-level maps for voxelwise measures of ALFF
(Upper) and fALFF (Lower). Before group-level analyses, each participant’s ALFF/fALFF map is Z-transformed, such that positive voxels reﬂect greater lowfrequency ﬂuctuation amplitudes than baseline (whole brain mean) and negative voxels reﬂect low-frequency ﬂuctuation amplitudes below baseline. The
second column depicts voxels exhibiting signiﬁcant effects of center, as detected by one-way ANOVA (across 24 centers, including 1,093 participants). Columns
3 and 4 depict voxels exhibiting age- and sex-related variations. Center, age, and sex ﬁndings were corrected for multiple comparisons (Z > 2.3; P < 0.05,
corrected). “Male” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in males; similarly, “female” refers to signiﬁcantly greater connectivity in females. “Older” refers
to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with increasing age, whereas “younger” refers to signiﬁcantly increasing connectivity with decreasing age.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

9 of 10

Table S1. Data currently included in the 1,000 Functional Connectomes Project

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Center

PI

N

Baltimore, MD
Bangor, UK
Beijing, China
Beijing, China
Berlin, Germany
Bethesda, MD
Cambridge, MA
Cambridge, MA
Cleveland, OH
Dallas, TX
Hvidovre, Denmark
Leiden, The Netherlands
Leipzig, Germany
Magdeburg, Germany
Milwaukee, WI
New Haven, CT
†
New York, NY
†
New York, NY
Newark, NJ
‡
Orangeburg, NY
‡
Oulu, Finland
Oxford, UK
Queensland, Australia
St. Louis, MO

J. J. Pekar/S. H. Mostofsky
S. Colcombe
YF. Zang
XC. Weng
D. Margulies
M. Ernst
R. L. Buckner
S. Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli
M. J. Lowe
B. Rypma
A.-M. Dogonowski/K. Madsen
S. A. R. B. Rombouts
A. Villringer
M. Walter
SJ. Li
M. Hampson
M. Milham/F. X. Castellanos
M. Milham/F. X. Castellanos
B. B. Biswal
M. J. Hoptman
V. J. Kiviniemi/J Veijola
S. M. Smith/C. Mackay
K. McMahon
B. L. Schlaggar/S. E. Petersen

23
20
198
28
26
18
198
39
31
24
28
31
37
29
64
19
59
20
19
21
103
22
19
31

n*

193
27

35

28
18

20

18

Age
years, mean (SD)
29.26
23.4
21.16
20.41
29.77
33.00
21.03
25.09
43.55
42.63
41.75
22.19
26.22
30.43
53.59
31.61
32.78
29.75
24.11
40.65
21.52
29
26.28
25.1

(5.46)
(5.32)
(1.83)
(1.39)
(5.21)
(13.31)
(2.31)
(3.53)
(11.14)
(20.07)
(10.7)
(2.57)
(5)
(5.71)
(5.79)
(10.27)
(8.83)
(9.94)
(3.91)
(11.03)
(0.57)
(3.79)
(3.71)
(2.31)

Age range
years

Male sex
%

20–40
19–38
18–26
18–24
23–44
18–53
18–30
20–32
24–60
20–71
21–68
18–28
20–42
22–43
44–65
18–48
20–49
18–46
21–39
20–55
20–23
20–35
20–34
21–29

35%
100%
39%
27%
50%
22%
38%
49%
35%
50%
50%
74%
43%
93%
64%
56%
68%
40%
47%
75%
36%
55%
61%
45%

Data from the following centers will be included in the 1000 Functional Connectomes data release but are not included in the
current analyses: Ann Arbor, MI: C. S. Monk/R. D. Seidler/S. J. Peltier; Atlanta, GA: H. S. Mayberg; Berlin, Germany: S. Schmidt; Durham,
NC: D. J. Madden; Durham, NC: L. Wang; London, Ontario, Canada: P. Williamson; Munich, Germany, C. Sorg/V. Riedl; Nanjing, China:
GJ. Teng/HY. Zhang; Pittsburgh, PA: G.J. Siegle; Portland, OR: D. Fair/B. J. Nagel; Taipei, Taiwan: CP. Lin; Vienna, Austria: C. Windischberger.
*Actual number of participants included in the analysis, if different from N.
†
Data from the same magnet, different sequence.
‡
1.5-T magnet.
Funding sources for each contributor (numbered by site): 1: R01 MH085328, R01 MH078160, HD-24061 (Intellectual Disabilities
Research Center), M01 RR00052 (Johns Hopkins General Clinical Research Center) and P41 RR15241 (National Center for Research
Resources); 3: NSFC (No.30621130074); 4: Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2007CB512300); 5: Berlin School of Mind and
Brain (DFG); 7: Howard Hughes Medical Institute; 9: National Multiple Sclerosis Society; 13: Competence Net Stroke (BMBF) and Berlin
School of Mind and Brain (DFG); 17-18: NIDA (RO1DA016979), NIMH (RO1MH083246), Stavros Niarchos Foundation; 19: NINDS
(RO1NS049176); 20: R01 MH064783, R21 MH084031, R01 MH0663674; 21: Academy of Finland (Grant codes 124257, 212181,
214273); 23: Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery grant (DP0452264); 24: NIH NS053425; Atlanta, G.A.: H.S. Mayberg: URC
Grant, Emory University; Durham, NC: D.J. Madden: NIH/NIA R01 AG011622; Durham, NC: L. Wang: Paul B. Beeson Career Developmental Awards (K23-AG028982); Portland, OR: D. Fair/B. Nagel: Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Institute, Medical Research
Foundation, UNCF-Merck, Ford Foundation, Dana Foundation; Taipei, Taiwan: C-P. Lin: National Health Research Institute grant (NHRIEX98-9813EC), Taiwan; Vienna, Austria: C. Windischberger: OeNB-P11468 and OeNB-P12982.

Biswal et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/0911855107

10 of 10

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

8

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Paper	  2:	  Repeated	  pain	  induces	  adaptations	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  to	  reflect	  past	  and	  predict	  future	  
pain	  (Neuroimage	  2011)	  
NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

NeuroImage
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s e v i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / y n i m g

Repeated pain induces adaptations of intrinsic brain activity to reﬂect past and
predict future pain
Valentin Riedl a,c,⁎, Michael Valet a, Andreas Wöller b, Christian Sorg b, Dominik Vogel a, Till Sprenger d,
Henning Boecker e, Afra M. Wohlschläger c, Thomas R. Tölle a
a

Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Ismaningerstrasse 22, 81675 Munich, Germany
Department of Psychiatry, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Ismaningerstrasse 22, 81675 Munich, Germany
Department of Neuroradiology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Ismaningerstrasse 22, 81675 Munich, Germany
d
Department of Neurology and Division of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Basel, Petersgraben 4, 4031 Basel, Switzerland
e
Functional Neuroimaging Group, Department of Radiology, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universitaet Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany
b
c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 15 November 2010
Revised 23 March 2011
Accepted 5 April 2011
Available online 13 April 2011
Keywords:
Intrinsic connectivity network
Pain
Resting state
Plasticity
Intrinsic brain activity
Learning
Prediction
Memory

a b s t r a c t
Recent neuroimaging studies have revealed a persistent architecture of intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs)
in the signal of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of humans and other species. ICNs are
characterized by coherent ongoing activity between distributed brain regions during rest, in the absence of
externally oriented behavior. While these networks strongly reﬂect anatomical connections, the relevance of
ICN activity for human behavior remains unclear. Here, we investigated whether intrinsic brain activity adapts
to repeated pain and encodes an individual's experience. Healthy subjects received a short episode of heat
pain on 11 consecutive days. Across this period, subjects either habituated or sensitized to the painful
stimulation. This adaptation was reﬂected in plasticity of a sensorimotor ICN (SMN) comprising pain related
brain regions: coherent intrinsic activity of the somatosensory cortex retrospectively mirrored pain
perception; on day 11, intrinsic activity of the prefrontal cortex was additionally synchronized with the
SMN and predicted whether an individual would experience more or less pain during upcoming stimulation.
Other ICNs of the intrinsic architecture remained unchanged. Due to the ubiquitous occurrence of ICNs in
several species, we suggest intrinsic brain activity as an integrative mechanism reﬂecting accumulated
experiences.
© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Traditionally, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
studies have investigated changes of brain activity in response to
sensory, motor or cognitive tasks that subjects performed in the MR
scanner. Only recently, colleagues have revealed networks of
distributed brain regions that are characterized by coherent ongoing
activity in subjects at rest, in the absence of any observable behavior
(Biswal et al., 1995; Greicius et al., 2003; Laufs et al., 2003;
Damoiseaux et al., 2006; Fox and Raichle, 2007). These resting-state
or intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) strongly resemble previously described task-activation patterns (Smith et al., 2009). However, the relevance of ICNs for human behavior remains a controversial
issue.

⁎ Corresponding author at: Dept. of Neurology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar der
Technischen Universität München, Ismaningerstrasse 22, 81675 München, Germany.
Fax: + 49 89 4140 7665.
E-mail address: valentin.riedl@mytum.de (V. Riedl).

ICNs transcend levels of consciousness and consistently occur in
humans, monkeys and rats (Lu et al., 2007; Vincent et al., 2007;
Greicius et al., 2008; Larson-Prior et al., 2009; Biswal et al., 2010). The
ubiquity and robustness of the intrinsic functional architecture
strongly supports the notion of ICNs reﬂecting underlying structural
connectivity (Fox and Raichle, 2007; Hagmann et al., 2008; Honey et
al., 2009). But there have also been reports of immediate variations in
the coherence of ICNs associated with task performance of humans
(Fox et al., 2007; Seeley et al., 2007; Albert et al., 2009; Lewis et al.,
2009). We therefore hypothesize that at least portions of ICN activity
continuously adapt with ongoing experiences and that intrinsic brain
activity reﬂects past and anticipates future experiences.
In this study, we focused on repeated pain experiences and their
relation to ICN activity before and after pain. More concretely, we asked
whether recurring pain modulates functional connectivity (FC) within
pain-relevant ICNs in a way that reﬂects recent pain and enables the
prediction of future pain experiences. FC is a measure to quantify the
strength of covarying activity between distributed voxels or brain
regions. We derived ICNs by applying Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) to resting state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data. Acute pain is

1053-8119/$ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.04.011

	  

30	  

V. Riedl et al. / NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213

consistently associated with neuronal activity in a distinct network of
subcortical and cortical brain regions (Apkarian et al., 2005; Tracey and
Mantyh, 2007). Among these, somatosensory cortices (SSC) process
sensory aspects of pain, while the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) has been associated with its modulation (Koyama et al., 2005;
Seymour et al., 2005). Despite our knowledge about activating these
brain regions by acute pain, less is known about their role in encoding
past and future pain. Yet, understanding how the brain processes pain
beyond an immediate experience might help to explain the development of chronic pain conditions.
Materials and methods
Participants
Thirteen healthy male volunteers without any history of neurological, psychiatric or pain disease participated in this study. All
participants received detailed information about the experimental
procedures, were free to withdraw from the study at any time, and
gave written informed consent. The Ethics Committee of the
university hospital “Klinikum Rechts der Isar” (Technische Universitaet Muenchen) approved the protocols of the study. The data of an
additional group of 16 healthy subjects that were scanned on the
same scanner twice within a 14-day interval while participating in
another study of our department were re-examined as a control group
(Sorg et al., 2007).

207

Processing of imaging data
Data preprocessing and ICA were performed as previously applied
to rs-fMRI data in our group (Sorg et al., 2007).
Preprocessing
Functional MRI data were pre-processed using the SPM software
package (SPM5, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology,
London) and in-house code for Matlab 7.1 (MathWorks, Natick,
MA). Data were motion corrected, spatially normalized into the
stereotactic space of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) and
spatially smoothed with an 8x8x8 mm Gaussian kernel. Before the
volumes were entered into the ICA analysis we applied a voxel-wise ztransformation on the time-course data yijk(t) by subtracting the
mean b yijk N and dividing by the standard deviation σijk: ŷijk(t) = (yijk
(t) − b yijkN) / σijk (t being the time, indices i, j, k represent the three
directions in space). The sensitivity of the multivariate ICA algorithm
for correlation of variance between voxels, i.e. functional connectivity,
was thereby rendered independent of the original BOLD signal
magnitude across subjects.
ICA

Imaging data

We used the Group ICA toolbox (GIFT 1.3d; icatb.sourceforge.net)
established for independent component analyses of fMRI data
(Calhoun et al., 2001, 2009, 2004). The toolbox performed the analysis
in four stages on a concatenated data set comprising the 4 rs-fMRI
runs of all subjects: ﬁrst the GIFT dimensionality tool estimated 18
independent components (IC) based upon the MDL criteria (Li et al.,
2007). The aggregated data set was then reduced using principal
component analysis (PCA) before the Infomax ICA algorithm (Bell and
Sejnowski, 1995) calculated the ICs. For each individual GIFT ﬁnally
reconstructed independent spatial maps of each rs-fMRI run (Calhoun
et al., 2001) converted to z-scores. Hence individual maps are
normalized with respect to variance in the component timecourse
and the between-subject analyses are then performed on the maps of
spatial weights (REF calhoun 2004). From the group spatial maps, we
selected functionally relevant ICNs in a fully automated manner. On
the basis of previous descriptions of brain regions covered by each ICN
(Brodmann areas in Damoiseaux et al., 2008; Sorg et al., 2007), we
created spatial templates representing each ICN using the marsbar
toolbox (http://marsbar.sourceforge.net/). We then calculated the
spatial regression of these templates against the ICA-derived maps as
implemented in the GIFT toolbox and selected the best-ﬁt ICNs from
our analysis. From this set of ICNs we selected those networks that
covered at least one brain region previously described in taskactivation studies of pain processing in humans (Bingel et al., 2007;
Gundel et al., 2008): primary and secondary somatosensory cortices,
medial and lateral prefrontal cortices, insula, cingulate cortex and
thalamus; see Table S2 for peak coordinates. Before we entered the
individual's spatial maps into second-level statistics we reintegrated
the initially calculated scaling factor σijk into the data by voxel-wise
multiplication in order to preserve each individual's proﬁle of
variance magnitude while leaving the normalized timecourse component unchanged (Sorg et al., 2007).

We collected functional neuroimaging data on a 1.5 Tesla Siemens
Symphony magnetic resonance system (Erlangen, Germany) using a
gradient-echo EPI sequence (TE = 50 ms, TR = 3000 ms, ﬂip
angle = 90°, FoV = 230 mm2, matrix = 64 x 64, 28 slices, slice
thickness = 5 mm). Subjects were instructed to think of nothing
particular and keep their eyes closed. Each rs-fMRI run comprised 117
functional volumes (~ 6 min) of which the ﬁrst 3 volumes were
discarded due to T1 saturation effects. Structural MRI data
(TE = 3.93 ms, TR = 1500 ms, TI = 760 ms, ﬂip angle = 5°, FoV = 256
mm2, matrix = 256 × 256, 160 slices, voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm3) were
acquired at the end of each session.

Second-level statistics
Group analyses were performed on the back-reconstructed spatial
maps of all 13 subjects using SPM5 (Wellcome Trust Centre for
Neuroimaging, UCL, London). We ﬁrst evaluated the consistency of
each ICN across sessions by calculating a repeated-measures ANOVA
on the spatial maps of all 4 runs that we projected on a mean
anatomical image of all subjects (p b 0.05, FDR-corrected)(see Fig. S1).
We then tested the ﬁve ICNs comprising pain related brain regions
(maps B, C, F, G, J/K of Fig. S1) for plastic changes in response to the
11 days of repeated pain and entered the four spatial maps of each
subject into within-subject ANOVAs (factors “subject,”“session PRE/

Experimental design
Volunteers received a daily series of 8 painful and 8 non-painful
alternating heat stimuli (40 s each, followed by 20 s baseline) on 11
consecutive working days. On the ﬁrst and last day of the study we
acquired resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) data during 6 min
before (PREpain) and after (POSTpain) painful stimulation. At the
beginning of each fMRI session we collected an anxiety score (5-point
Likert scale) from each subject in order to control for an overall level
of arousal or anxiety to the study. The thermal stimulation protocol
has previously been implemented in our group and described in detail
(Valet et al., 2004). On the ﬁrst day the pain threshold was assessed
for each subject individually. Painful stimuli (1 °C above the pain
threshold) were then applied via a thermode to the inner side of the
right forearm in an undulating way and to one of three possible
positions on the forearm to prevent skin sensitization. For each
subject the stimulation temperature was kept constant during the
11 days of painful stimulation and the absolute temperature only
varied slightly within the group (median: 44.0 ± 1 °C). After the
stimulation period the volunteers rated the perceived pain intensity
(PAIN) on an 11-point numerical rating scale (NRS). Differences in
PAIN-ratings between days 1 and 11 were tested nonparametrically
using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (p b 0.05).

208

V. Riedl et al. / NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213

Fig. 1. Study design and brain network analysis. (A) Healthy volunteers received a short episode of noxious heat stimuli to their right forearm on 11 consecutive days and
subsequently rated the perceived pain intensity (PAIN) on a numerical rating scale (0–10). Before (PREpain) and after (POSTpain) stimulation on the initial and last day of the study,
we measured intrinsic brain activity in subjects at rest with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI). (B) Intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) covering brain
regions known to process pain. We extracted ICNs representing the functional connectivity (FC) between brain regions with independent component analysis (ICA). We then tested
ICNs including brain regions known to process pain for short-term (within day) and long-term (across 11 days) changes in response to the repeated pain. *Only the sensorimotor ICN
(SMN) revealed changes of coherent intrinsic activity during rest in response to repeated pain (see Fig. 2).

POST,”“day 1/11”). The resulting SPMs were masked with the
average effect of conditions and FDR-corrected on the voxel level
(p b 0.05).

ΔNRS (NRSday11 − NRSday1) for PAIN and Δz-score (zday11 − zday1) for
FC. The correlations were tested for signiﬁcance using nonparametric
Spearman's rho measure (p b 0.05) and FDR-corrected for the
8 correlations tested.

Regression analysis of behavioral and network scores
Results
For the regression analyses of behavioral and functional imaging
data we used each individual's PAIN rating and FC scores representing
a brain region's participation in an ICN. For each individual we
calculated the FC-score as the mean z-score of all voxels within a
regions-of-interest (ROI) from the ICA-derived spatial map. The
coordinates for a combined SSC/PPC and a vmPFC ROI (r = 10 mm)
were taken from two independent fMRI studies on pain processing
(Bingel et al., 2007; Gundel et al., 2008) listed in Table S2. In case
multiple clusters have been reported for a region, those coordinates
were chosen that maximally covered grey matter in our dataset as
validated with the grey matter segmentation masks from SPM5. On
day 11, behavioral and neuroimaging data strongly depend on the
subject's initial experience of the noxious stimulation. All scores on
day 11 are therefore referenced to the status of day 1 and calculated as

Healthy volunteers received a short episode of noxious heat
stimulation to their right forearm and subsequently rated the
perceived pain intensity. We repeated this procedure on 11
consecutive days and recorded 6 min of rs-fMRI before (PREpain)
and after (POSTpain) painful stimulation on the initial and last day of
the study (Fig. 1A).
Long-term adaptations of behavior and functional connectivity to
repeated pain
We observed long-term adaptations to 11 days of experimentally
induced pain both in behavioral and functional imaging data.
Following each stimulation period, subjects rated the level of

V. Riedl et al. / NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213

209

Fig. 2. Long-term adaptations of behavior and intrinsic SMN activity to repeated pain. (A) Mean PAIN ratings across 11 days of noxious stimulation with signiﬁcantly lower PAIN
between days 1 and 11 (p = 0.012, two-tailed Wilcoxon test, n = 13). Error bars indicate standard error of mean. (B) Network plasticity in the SMN after 11 days of noxious
stimulation. The statistical parametric map (SPM) shows brain regions with increased FC in the SMN at the group level rendered on a mean anatomical image of all subjects (p b 0.05,
FDR-corrected, zmax = 4.20). The analysis revealed signiﬁcantly higher FC in bilateral somatosensory (SSC), left posterior parietal (PPC) and ventromedial prefrontal (vmPFC)
cortices. Peak-voxel coordinates in MNI space [x y z]: SSC left/right (BA 2,3) [− 21 −30 66]/[36–30 57], [15–45 66], PCC left (BA 5) [− 18 −60 66], [− 27 −51 69], vmPFC (BA 11/12)
[0 42–18]. BA, Brodmann area. (C) The SMN on day 1 (left) and day 11 (right). Conjunction maps are overlaid on a mean anatomical image of all subjects (p b 0.05, FDR-corrected,
zmax = 7.90). Additionally, average FC-scores of the two SPM clusters (red: medial and lateral parts of SSC/PPC, green: vmPFC cluster) are plotted for illustration purposes. The FCscore encodes the participation of a brain region within an ICN and was calculated as the mean z-score of all voxels within this cluster. Error bars indicate standard error of mean.

perceived pain intensity. Fig. 2A shows the exponential decay of
experienced pain over 11 days (averaged data of all 13 volunteers)
resulting in signiﬁcantly lower PAIN ratings between days 1 and 11
(p = 0.012), a ﬁnding supported by previous reports (Bingel et al.,
2007). From the imaging data, we identiﬁed ﬁve ICNs covering brain
regions known for pain processing (Fig. 1B and Table S2) by applying
network-sensitive group-ICA to a concatenated data set of the 4 rsfMRI runs of all subjects (Fig. S1) (Albert et al., 2009; Calhoun et al.,
2009; Beckmann et al., 2005; Damoiseaux et al., 2006; Greicius, 2008;
Sorg et al., 2007). We then tested these ICNs in SPM for FC changes in
response to the painful stimulation. The within-subject ANOVA
revealed long-term plasticity in two pain related brain regions of
the sensorimotor ICN (SMN) (Fig. 2B, p b 0.05 FDR-corrected): after
11 days of painful stimulation, coherent intrinsic activity signiﬁcantly
increased between bilateral somatosensory (SSC)/posterior parietal
(PPC) cortices. Additionally, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) was recruited into the SMN by coherent activity (Fig. 2B, C
right). Initially, the SMN encompasses somatosensory, posterior
parietal and motor cortices (Fig. 2C left). Tests for “within-day” and
interaction effects in the ANOVA revealed no signiﬁcance in the SPM
at p b 0.01 uncorrected at the voxel level (k N 10 voxel/mm3).

The vmPFC has been described in several different ICNs of resting
state fMRI analyses (Baliki et al., 2008; Damoiseaux et al., 2006;
Dhond et al., 2008; Seeley et al., 2007; Smith et al., 2009; Sorg et al.,
2007). It is therefore crucial to distinguish an additional recruitment
of a brain region into an ICN from a simple shift of connectivity for this
brain region from one ICN into another. The latter can be ruled out
from our data, as we found no signiﬁcant short- and long-term
adaptations (p b 0.01 uncorrected at the voxel level; k N 10 voxel/mm3)
in other ICNs that covered the vmPFC. Therefore, FC changes after
11 days occurred selectively in the SMN.
To prove the consistency of intrinsic networks and to exclude any
artiﬁcial fMRI scanning drifts or habituation effects of repetitive fMRI
scanning of the SMN across several days we chose rs-fMRI data from a
control group of healthy subjects (n = 16). This control group was
scanned twice with identical scanning parameters on the same
scanner in a 2-week interval while participating in another study
(Sorg et al., 2007). The SMN was identiﬁed and analyzed as described
in the methods section. We found no changes in the SMN of this
control group (p b 0.01 uncorrected) which demonstrates the consistency and robustness of intrinsic networks across days and which is in
accordance with other test–retest studies (Albert et al., 2010; Biswal

210

V. Riedl et al. / NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213

et al., 2010; Damoiseaux et al., 2006; Meindl et al., 2010; Shehzad et
al., 2009). Therefore, we attribute the long-term FC changes in the
SMN of our study group to the effects of repetitive painful stimulation.

of POSTpain encoding in the somatosensory system adapts with the
level of PREpain activity in the vmPFC within the same ICN.
Discussion

Activity of distinct brain regions in the intrinsic SMN reﬂects past and
future pain
Brain imaging studies have found increased electrical or BOLD
signal activity in primary sensory cortices immediately following
tactile or painful stimulation (Albanese et al., 2007; Ohara et al.,
2006). We hypothesized that a short episode of pain might also affect
the intrinsic FC of the somatosensory system. We therefore tested
whether the level of pain that a subject experienced correlates with
the coherent intrinsic activity of the SSC/PPC region during POSTpain
rest. We extracted the FC of the SSC/PPC by calculating the mean zscore of all voxels within a region of interest (ROI) that we
independently derived from task-fMRI studies (Table S2). The
regression analysis between PAIN and POSTpain FC (day 1) (Fig. 3A)
of the ﬁrst day shows that higher pain perception is associated with
increased FC in SSC/PPC minutes after stimulation (r = 0.57, p = 0.02).
In contrast, we found no correlation between PAIN and FC during rest
prior to painful stimulation (r = − 0.03, p = 0.80). This means that a
recent painful experience substantially modulates coherent activity in
somatosensory cortices of the SMN. Notably, this effect was also
present in the resting state data from day 11. The signiﬁcant
correlation between PAIN and POSTpain FC (day 11) in SSC/PPC
(r = 0.52, p = 0.03) supports the notion of retrospective coding in the
SMN also to repeatedly processed noxious stimuli.
We then investigated behavioral correlates for the intrinsic
coupling of vmPFC into the SMN that we observed after 11 days of
stimulation. fMRI data acquired during pain processing have revealed
a modulating role of vmPFC in pain perception (Apkarian et al., 2005;
Bingel et al., 2007; Ohara et al., 2006; Seymour et al., 2005). Hence the
vmPFC might already fulﬁll an anticipatory role in the SMN prior to
the re-occurrence of previously experienced and learned perceptions.
We extracted the vmPFC's FC-score from the ICA spatial maps prior to
stimulation and correlated it with each subject's PAIN rating. As our
subjects adapted from a broad range of initial PAIN ratings across the
study period, we entered difference values (day 11 − day 1) for the
data from the last day of the study. After 11 days of repeated exposure,
a signiﬁcant correlation between PREpain FC of vmPFC and PAIN
exists (r = 0.65 p = 0.015) (Fig. 3B, top). This plot also revealed that
three subjects sensitized with repeated stimulation resulting in the
strongest increase in FC of the vmPFC with the SMN.
To further substantiate the speciﬁcity of adapted vmPFC connectivity for upcoming pain, we also evaluated data from the initial day of the
study as well as the somatosensory system of the SMN. PAIN ratings
were indeed exclusively related to vmPFC activity on day 11. We found
neither correlation between PAIN and PREpain FC of the vmPFC on the
initial day of the study (r = 0.36 p = 0.23), nor with PREpain FC of the
SSC/PPC region on day 11 (r = −0.003, p = 0.99). Additionally, we
aimed at controlling for a potential “session effect” that might account
for the increased FC in the vmPFC. We therefore entered the anxiety
score that we collected at the beginning of each fMRI session as an
additional parameter into a partial correlation analysis of PREpain FC in
vmPFC and PAIN rating. The analysis revealed that the correlation
between adapted PAIN and intrinsic FC of the vmPFC before stimulation
remains signiﬁcant, even when controlling for the habituation
parameter of anxiety (r = 0.60 p = 0.043).
Finally, we tested intra-network dependencies between long-term
changes in vmPFC and the somatosensory system. We correlated the
FC-score of vmPFC before painful stimulation with the FC-score of SSC/
PPC after stimulation. Fig. 3B (bottom) shows the signiﬁcant correlation
between PREpain FC in vmPFC and POSTpain FC in SSC/PPC (r = 0.70,
p = 0.007). Importantly, autocorrelation effects between regions and
scanning sessions were ruled out (p N 0.40). This means that the extent

In this study, we found that coherent ongoing activity between
pain processing brain regions in the resting state changes with
repeatedly experienced pain. Within the SMN, FC of the somatosensory system reﬂected retrospective coding of recent pain, while
activity in the vmPFC anticipated forthcoming pain of a repeatedly
experienced episode.
Repeated pain leads to increased coherent activity of pain regions in the
resting state
After 11 days of pain sensation, bilateral somatosensory cortices
exhibited increased intrinsic brain activity within the SMN. Additionally, vmPFC was recruited into the SMN on day 11. The FC of remaining
brain regions in this and four other ICNs did not change. Notably, the
two brain regions that adapted to repeated pain play a fundamental
role in the processing of acute pain (Apkarian et al., 2005; Tracey and
Mantyh, 2007). While somatosensory cortices process sensory
discriminatory information of a pain sensation, the vmPFC has been
ascribed a modulatory role in pain perception (Ploghaus et al., 2003;
Apkarian et al., 2005; Bingel et al., 2007; Seymour et al., 2005). Hence,
our data show that repeated pain selectively alters intrinsic
connectivity between brain regions initially involved in processing
acute pain sensations.
Our data suggest that pain processing is not restricted to the
immediate experience but continues during the resting state. While
no study so far revealed long-term dynamics of ICNs in response to
pain, two recent studies demonstrated an immediate interaction of
pain with ICNs. Acupuncture modulates connectivity between pain
regions in the default mode and sensorimotor ICN during the minutes
after treatment (Dhond et al., 2008). Baliki et al. found that taskrelated deactivations of the DMN were diminished in patients with
chronic back pain, especially in the vmPFC (Baliki et al., 2008). It is
important to note that the ensemble of brain regions processing acute
pain does not form a single pain ICN during rest. These brain areas are
rather synchronized with various ICNs, such as the sensorimotor,
default mode or salience network (Fig. 1B). In our study, only the
sensorimotor ICN showed functional plasticity in response to repeated
pain with increased coherent activity between somatosensory regions
and an additionally recruited vmPFC. This implies that ICNs do not
form a rigid architecture but adapt with continuous experiences. In
the following, we will discuss a potential role of the two SMN
subsystems for distinctive coding of past and future aspects of
repeated pain.
Activity in distinct parts of the SMN support learning and anticipation of
pain
The resting-state connectivity of the SMN increased following the
intervention (Fig. 3A). Before stimulation, however, FC in these
regions did not indicate any behavioral relevance. Our ﬁnding is in
accordance with electrophysiological data indicating that short-term
memory encoding of incoming sensory information (Pasternak and
Greenlee, 2005), and speciﬁcally of pain (Albanese et al., 2007; Ohara
et al., 2006), involves primary sensory brain regions. Furthermore,
learning related plasticity of the intrinsic functional architecture has
recently been shown for the visual and motor system (Albert et al.,
2009; Lewis et al., 2009). Here, we show that intrinsic brain activity in
a subsystem of the SMN retrospectively encodes an individual pain
experience. Moreover, we found that behavioral adaptations to the
same sensation (pain rating on day 11) are also reﬂected in adapted
FC of the somatosensory system. Together, these studies and our data

V. Riedl et al. / NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213
Fig. 3. Distinct coding of learning and anticipation of pain in the SMN. (A) During the POSTpain resting state, FC in SSC/PPC correlates with the individual PAIN rating (lower graph: r = 0.57, p = 0.02, n = 13), while no correlation was found
during PREpain resting state (upper graph: r = − 0.03, p = 0.80, n = 13). (B) After 11 days of pain, the change in resting state FC in the vmPFC before stimulation already predicts the change in PAIN rating and in FC of the SSC/PPC. Upper graph:
FC in PREpain vmPFC correlates with subsequent PAIN ratings (r = 0.65 p = 0.015, n = 13). Lower graph: FC in PREpain vmPFC correlates with POSTpain FC in the somatosensory system (r = 0.70, p = 0.007, n = 13).

211

212

V. Riedl et al. / NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213

suggest that intrinsic brain activity is involved in memory coding of
past experiences in various sensory modalities and continuously
adapts with learning.
Intrinsic brain activity in the vmPFC predicted subjective pain
intensity of a noxious stimulation minutes before the actual sensation.
Importantly, predictive coding only evolved after subjects had
repeatedly experienced, or learned, this particular situation. While
most subjects habituated, three subjects rated the identical stimulation as being more painful than on the ﬁrst day of the study. The
sensitization of these individuals was predicted by the strongest
coupling between vmPFC and the somatosensory system within the
SMN. However, the prefrontal cortex is a heterogeneous brain region
subserving various cognitive and regulatory functions. Therefore,
further data are needed to concretize the cognitive processes
underlying the “anticipatory coding” after repeated experiences
suggested here. While we already corrected for several experimental
parameters and anxiety as a potential confounding factor, a mixture of
bodily and cognitive processes might account for the effect observed
in the vmPFC. A limitation of this study is that we could not compare
subjects perceiving repeated pain to subjects perceiving a different
sensory sensation. Still, the circumscribed long-term effects in
somatosensory and medial prefrontal regions ﬁt well with the
literature on brain activations during repeated acute pain and during
chronic pain conditions (see following paragraph).
“Chronic pain is a state of continuous learning” (Apkarian et al.,
2009). The anticipatory role we observed in vmPFC during the resting
state might account for this learning effect. The literature on pain
processing points to opposite brain activity in prefrontal regions
between healthy subjects and patients suffering from chronic pain
(Apkarian et al., 2005; Baliki et al., 2006; Bingel et al., 2007; Gundel et
al., 2008). Healthy subjects that habituate to repeated pain show
decreased activation in mPFC during pain processing (Bingel et al.,
2007). In chronic pain patients, however, mPFC is the only region
within the pain network being more strongly involved in pain
processing as compared to normal subjects (Apkarian et al., 2005;
Baliki et al., 2006). Drawing from these observations in pain activation
studies, we suggest that intrinsic brain activity in the vmPFC
anticipates upcoming pain on the basis of previous experiences and
might ultimately indicate if an individual tends to pathological pain
sensitization.

Two layers of processing in the intrinsic functional architecture of ICNs
Our ﬁnding of a dynamic intrinsic architecture across several days
integrates two layers of processing currently discussed for ICNs (Fox
and Raichle, 2007). On the one hand, immediate changes in the
coherence of spontaneous activity are related to ﬂuctuations in
cognitive functions (Kelly et al., 2008; Mason et al., 2007; Seeley et al.,
2007) and motor behavior (Fox et al., 2007, 2006). This suggests a
volatile layer of intrinsic brain ﬂuctuations inﬂuencing behavior in the
range of seconds. On the other hand, intrinsic brain activity forms
highly consistent patterns of synchronized brain regions in humans
(Biswal et al., 2010; Smith et al., 2009), various species (Lu et al., 2007;
Vincent et al., 2007) and even reduced states of vigilance (Boly et al.,
2008; Horovitz et al., 2009). The intrinsic functional architecture
might therefore reﬂect a rather robust layer of anatomical connections
(Fox and Raichle, 2007; Vincent et al., 2007; Hagmann et al., 2008).
We suggest that coherent intrinsic activity stabilizes networks of
brain regions that are commonly activated together across the life
span but continuously adapts to interactions with the environment to
prepare the organism for what may happen. The intrinsic brain state
might therefore have more impact on human behavior than does the
brain's immediate response to an event (Fox and Raichle, 2007).
Supplementary materials related to this article can be found online
at doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.04.011.

Acknowledgments
Valentin Riedl wishes to thank Karl Friston, Olaf Sporns, Walter
Zieglgaensberger, Tom Eichele, Christopher Honey and Markus Ploner
for advice and discussions and Christine Vogg for technical assistance.
Supported by the 01EV0710 grant and the “German Research
Network on Neuropathic Pain” (DFNS) of the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, BMBF) and by the SFB391C9 grant of the German Research
Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG).
V.R., M.V. and A.W. equally contributed to this work.
References
Albanese, M.C., Duerden, E.G., Rainville, P., Duncan, G.H., 2007. Memory traces of pain in
human cortex. J. Neurosci. 27, 4612–4620.
Albert, N.B., Robertson, E.M., Miall, R.C., 2009. The resting human brain and motor
learning. Curr. Biol. 19, 1023–1027.
Apkarian, A.V., Bushnell, M.C., Treede, R.D., Zubieta, J.K., 2005. Human brain mechanisms
of pain perception and regulation in health and disease. Eur. J. Pain 9, 463–484.
Apkarian, A.V., Baliki, M.N., Geha, P.Y., 2009. Towards a theory of chronic pain. Prog.
Neurobiol. 87, 81–97.
Baliki, M.N., Chialvo, D.R., Geha, P.Y., Levy, R.M., Harden, R.N., Parrish, T.B., Apkarian, A.
V., 2006. Chronic pain and the emotional brain: speciﬁc brain activity associated
with spontaneous ﬂuctuations of intensity of chronic back pain. J. Neurosci. 26,
12165–12173.
Baliki, M.N., Geha, P.Y., Apkarian, A.V., Chialvo, D.R., 2008. Beyond feeling: chronic pain
hurts the brain, disrupting the default-mode network dynamics. J. Neurosci. 28,
1398–1403.
Beckmann, C.F., DeLuca, M., Devlin, J.T., Smith, S.M., 2005. Investigations into restingstate connectivity using independent component analysis. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 360, 1001–1013.
Bell, A.J., Sejnowski, T.J., 1995. An information-maximization approach to blind
separation and blind deconvolution. Neural Comput. 7, 1129–1159.
Bingel, U., Schoell, E., Herken, W., Büchel, C., May, A., 2007. Habituation to painful
stimulation involves the antinociceptive system. Pain 131, 21–30.
Biswal, B., Yetkin, F.Z., Haughton, V.M., Hyde, J.S., 1995. Functional connectivity in the
motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 34,
537–541.
Biswal, B.B., Mennes, M., Zuo, X.N., Gohel, S., Kelly, C., Smith, S.M., Beckmann, C.F.,
Adelstein, J.S., Buckner, R.L., Colcombe, S., et al., 2010. Toward discovery science of
human brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 4734–4739.
Boly, M., Phillips, C., Tshibanda, L., Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Schabus, M., Dang-Vu, T.T.,
Moonen, G., Hustinx, R., Maquet, P., Laureys, S., 2008. Intrinsic brain activity in
altered states of consciousness: how conscious is the default mode of brain
function? Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1129, 119–129.
Calhoun, V.D., Adali, T., Pearlson, G.D., Pekar, J.J., 2001. A method for making group
inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 14, 140–151.
Calhoun, V.D., Adali, T., Pekar, J.J., 2004. A method for comparing group fMRI data using
independent component analysis: application to visual, motor and visuomotor
tasks. Magn. Reson. Imaging 22, 1181–1191.
Calhoun, V.D., Liu, J., Adali, T., 2009. A review of group ICA for fMRI data and ICA for joint
inference of imaging, genetic, and ERP data. Neuroimage 45, S163–S172.
Damoiseaux, J.S., Rombouts, S.A., Barkhof, F., Scheltens, P., Stam, C.J., Smith, S.M.,
Beckmann, C.F., 2006. Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103, 13848–13853.
Damoiseaux, J.S., Beckmann, C.F., Arigita, E.J., Barkhof, F., Scheltens, P., Stam, C.J., Smith,
S.M., Rombouts, S.A., 2008. Reduced resting-state brain activity in the “default
network” in normal aging. Cereb. Cortex 18, 1856–1864.
Dhond, R.P., Yeh, C., Park, K., Kettner, N., Napadow, V., 2008. Acupuncture modulates
resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain networks. Pain 136,
407–418.
Fox, M.D., Raichle, M.E., 2007. Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed with
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 700–711.
Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Zacks, J.M., Raichle, M.E., 2006. Coherent spontaneous activity
accounts for trial-to-trial variability in human evoked brain responses. Nat.
Neurosci. 9, 23–25.
Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Vincent, J.L., Raichle, M.E., 2007. Intrinsic ﬂuctuations within
cortical systems account for intertrial variability in human behavior. Neuron 56,
171–184.
Greicius, M., 2008. Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders.
Curr. Opin. Neurol. 21, 424–430.
Greicius, M.D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A.L., Menon, V., 2003. Functional connectivity in the
resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 100, 253–258.
Greicius, M.D., Kiviniemi, V., Tervonen, O., Vainionpaa, V., Alahuhta, S., Reiss, A.L.,
Menon, V., 2008. Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light
sedation. Hum. Brain Mapp. 29, 839–847.
Gundel, H., Valet, M., Sorg, C., Huber, D., Zimmer, C., Sprenger, T., Tolle, T.R., 2008.
Altered cerebral response to noxious heat stimulation in patients with somatoform
pain disorder. Pain 137, 413–421.

V. Riedl et al. / NeuroImage 57 (2011) 206–213
Hagmann, P., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Meuli, R., Honey, C.J., Wedeen, V.J., Sporns, O.,
2008. Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol. 6, e159.
Honey, C.J., Sporns, O., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Thiran, J.P., Meuli, R., Hagmann, P.,
2009. Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural
connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 2035–2040.
Horovitz, S.G., Braun, A.R., Carr, W.S., Picchioni, D., Balkin, T.J., Fukunaga, M., Duyn, J.H.,
2009. Decoupling of the brain's default mode network during deep sleep. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 11376–11381.
Kelly, A.M., Uddin, L.Q., Biswal, B.B., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., 2008. Competition
between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability. Neuroimage
39, 527–537.
Koyama, T., McHafﬁe, J.G., Laurienti, P.J., Coghill, R.C., 2005. The subjective experience of
pain: where expectations become reality. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102,
12950–12955.
Larson-Prior, L.J., Zempel, J.M., Nolan, T.S., Prior, F.W., Snyder, A.Z., Raichle, M.E., 2009.
Cortical network functional connectivity in the descent to sleep. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 106, 4489–4494.
Laufs, H., Krakow, K., Sterzer, P., Eger, E., Beyerle, A., Salek-Haddadi, A., Kleinschmidt, A.,
2003. Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default
modes in spontaneous brain activity ﬂuctuations at rest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
100, 11053–11058.
Lewis, C.M., Baldassarre, A., Committeri, G., Romani, G.L., Corbetta, M., 2009. Learning sculpts
the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106,
17558–17563.
Li, Y.O., Adali, T., Calhoun, V.D., 2007. Estimating the number of independent components
for functional magnetic resonance imaging data. Hum. Brain Mapp. 28, 1251–1266.
Lu, H., Zuo, Y., Gu, H., Waltz, J.A., 2007. Synchronized delta oscillations correlate with
the resting-state functional MRI signal. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104,
18265–18269.
Mason, M.F., Norton, M.I., Van Horn, J.D., Wegner, D.M., Grafton, S.T., Macrae, C.N., 2007.
Wandering minds: the default network and stimulus-independent thought.
Science 315, 393–395.
Meindl, T., Teipel, S., Elmouden, R., Mueller, S., Koch, W., Dietrich, O., Coates, U., Reiser,
M., Glaser, C., 2010. Test–retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in
healthy individuals. Hum. Brain Mapp. 31 (2), 237–246.

213

Ohara, S., Crone, N.E., Weiss, N., Lenz, F.A., 2006. Analysis of synchrony demonstrates
“pain networks” deﬁned by rapidly switching, task-speciﬁc, functional connectivity
between pain-related cortical structures. Pain 123, 244–253.
Pasternak, T., Greenlee, M.W., 2005. Working memory in primate sensory systems. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 6, 97–107.
Ploghaus, A., Becerra, L., Borras, C., Borsook, D., 2003. Neural circuitry underlying pain
modulation: expectation, hypnosis, placebo. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 197–200.
Seeley, W.W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A.F., Keller, J., Glover, G.H., Kenna, H., Reiss, A.L.,
Greicius, M.D., 2007. Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience
processing and executive control. J. Neurosci. 27, 2349–2356.
Seymour, B., O'Doherty, J.P., Koltzenburg, M., Wiech, K., Frackowiak, R., Friston, K.,
Dolan, R., 2005. Opponent appetitive-aversive neural processes underlie predictive
learning of pain relief. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1234–1240.
Shehzad, Z., Kelly, A.M., Reiss, P.T., Gee, D.G., Gotimer, K., Uddin, L.Q., Lee, S.H.,
Margulies, D.S., Roy, A.K., Biswal, B.B., et al., 2009. The resting brain: unconstrained
yet reliable. Cereb. Cortex 19, 2209–2229.
Smith, S.M., Fox, P.T., Miller, K.L., Glahn, D.C., Fox, P.M., Mackay, C.E., Filippini, N.,
Watkins, K.E., Toro, R., Laird, A.R., et al., 2009. Correspondence of the brain's
functional architecture during activation and rest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106,
13040–13045.
Sorg, C., Riedl, V., Muhlau, M., Calhoun, V.D., Eichele, T., Laer, L., Drzezga, A., Forstl, H.,
Kurz, A., Zimmer, C., et al., 2007. Selective changes of resting-state networks in
individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104,
18760–18765.
Tracey, I., Mantyh, P.W., 2007. The cerebral signature for pain perception and its
modulation. Neuron 55, 377–391.
Valet, M., Sprenger, T., Boecker, H., Willoch, F., Rummeny, E., Conrad, B., Erhard, P., Tolle,
T.R., 2004. Distraction modulates connectivity of the cingulo-frontal cortex and the
midbrain during pain—an fMRI analysis. Pain 109, 399–408.
van de Ven, V.G., Formisano, E., Prvulovic, D., Roeder, C.H., Linden, D.E., 2004. Functional
connectivity as revealed by spatial independent component analysis of fMRI
measurements during rest. Hum. Brain Mapp. 22, 165–178.
Vincent, J.L., Patel, G.H., Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Baker, J.T., Van Essen, D.C., Zempel, J.M.,
Snyder, L.H., Corbetta, M., Raichle, M.E., 2007. Intrinsic functional architecture in
the anaesthetized monkey brain. Nature 447, 83–86.

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Supplementary	  Material	  

	  
	  
Supplementary	  Figure	  S1	  Legend	  	  
ICNs	  derived	  from	  the	  group	  ICA.	  We	  identified	  12	  spatial	  maps	  covering	  previously	  described	  resting	  
state	  or	  intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  from	  our	  own	  group	  and	  others	  (Damoiseaux et al., 2006, 2008;
Sorg et al., 2007; van de Ven et al., 2004).	  We	  ordered	  the	  spatial	  maps	  following	  the	  most	  recent	  
description	  by	  Damoiseaux	  and	  colleagues	  (Damoiseaux et al., 2008).	  The	  ICNs	  show	  spatial	  patterns	  of	  
distinct	  brain	  regions	  previously	  known	  to	  be	  involved	  in	  A:	  visual	  processing,	  B/C:	  anterior	  and	  posterior	  
parts	  of	  the	  default	  mode	  network,	  D:	  ventral/reorienting	  attention	  network,	  E:	  working	  memory,	  F:	  
somatosensory	  and	  motor	  functions,	  H:	  dorsal/executive	  attention	  network,	  I:	  auditory	  processing,	  G:	  
executive	  control	  network,	  J/K:	  salience	  network	  and	  L:	  spatial	  attention	  network.	  Conjunction	  maps	  
(zmax=7.5)	  are	  overlaid	  on	  a	  mean	  structural	  image	  of	  all	  subjects.	  The	  left	  hemisphere	  of	  the	  brain	  
corresponds	  to	  the	  right	  side	  of	  the	  image.	  

	  
	  

38	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Supplementary	  Table	  S2	  
Brain region

Peak coordinates [x,y,z] in MNI space. Left / Right

Pain processing brain regions from a previous task-fMRI study of our group (Gundel et al., 2008)
Primary somatosensory cortex (SSC)

-36, -30, 66 / 36, -30, 66

Secondary somatosensory cortex

-42, -39, 21 / 57, -36, 18

Posterior parietal cortex (PPC)

-57, -48, 51 / 45, -48, 30

Insula

-42, 3, -3 / 39, 6, 9

Lateral prefrontal cortex

-45, 45, -9 / 39, 39, 0

Anterior cingulate cortex

-6, -21, 30 / 9, -18, 33

Thalamus

-12, -3, 6 / 12, -3, 6

Brain regions from a task-activation study on habituation to repeated pain (Bingel et al., 2007)
Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)

-6, 30, -9 / 3, 36, -12

Pain	  processing	  brain	  regions.	  Regions	  of	  interest	  (ROI)	  (r=10mm)	  reflecting	  pain	  processing	  brain	  
regions	  were	  independently	  derived	  from	  two	  previous	  task-­‐fMRI	  studies	  on	  immediate	  and	  repeated	  
pain	  processing	  in	  humans.	  In	  case	  multiple	  coordinates	  have	  been	  reported,	  those	  were	  chosen	  that	  
maximally	  covered	  grey	  matter	  in	  our	  dataset	  as	  validated	  with	  the	  grey	  matter	  segmentation	  masks	  from	  
SPM5.	  These	  ROIs	  were	  then	  used	  to	  select	  those	  ICNs	  for	  further	  analyses	  that	  covered	  at	  least	  one	  pain	  
processing	  ROI.	  Furthermore,	  the	  vmPFC-­‐ROI	  and	  a	  combined	  SSC/PPC-­‐ROI	  were	  used	  in	  the	  correlation	  
analyses.	  	  

	  

	  

	  

39	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

9

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Paper	  3:	  Intrinsic	  network	  connectivity	  reflects	  consistency	  of	  synesthetic	  experiences	  	  
(J	  Neurosci	  2012)	  

7614 • The Journal of Neuroscience, May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621

Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive

Intrinsic Network Connectivity Reflects Consistency of
Synesthetic Experiences
Anna Dovern,1,2 Gereon R. Fink,1,2 A. Christina B. Fromme,1 Afra M. Wohlschläger,3 Peter H. Weiss,1,2*
and Valentin Riedl3*
Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Research Centre Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, University
Hospital Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany, and 3Departments of Neuroradiology, Neurology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München,
81675 Munich, Germany
1

Studying cognitive processes underlying synesthesia, a condition in which stimulation of one sensory modality automatically leads to
abnormal additional sensory perception, allows insights into the neural mechanisms of normal and abnormal cross-modal sensory
processing.
Consistent with the notion that synesthesia results from hyperconnectivity, functional connectivity analysis (adopting independent
component analysis and seed-based correlation analysis) of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data of 12 grapheme–
color synesthetes and 12 nonsynesthetic control subjects revealed, in addition to increased intranetwork connectivity, both a global and
a specific (medial and lateral visual networks to a right frontoparietal network) increase of intrinsic internetwork connectivity in
grapheme– color synesthesia. Moreover, this increased intrinsic network connectivity reflected the strength of synesthetic experiences.
These findings constitute the first direct evidence of increased functional network connectivity in synesthesia.
In addition to this significant contribution to the understanding of the neural mechanisms of synesthesia, our results have important
general implications. In combination with data derived from clinical populations, our data strongly suggest that altered differences in
intrinsic network connectivity are directly related to the phenomenology of human experiences.

Introduction
Numbers or letters evoke additional color perceptions in grapheme– color synesthesia, one of the most common forms of synesthesia. Although to date the underlying neural mechanisms
remain elusive, it has often been hypothesized that the concomitant perception of a sensation not inherent to the stimulus is
caused by an increased connectivity (or hyperconnectivity) between the relevant brain regions (Hubbard and Ramachandran,
2005). During synesthetic experience, neural activity increases in
occipital and temporal brain regions involved in grapheme and
color processing, but also in parietal and frontal areas involved in
binding processes (Weiss et al., 2001, 2005; Nunn et al., 2002;
Hubbard and Ramachandran, 2005; Hubbard et al., 2005). In
addition to these findings from functional activation studies,
Received Oct. 26, 2011; revised April 5, 2012; accepted April 10, 2012.
Author contributions: A.D., G.R.F., A.C.B.F., A.M.W., P.H.W., and V.R. designed research; A.D., A.C.B.F., and
P.H.W. performed research; A.D., A.C.B.F., P.H.W., and V.R. analyzed data; A.D., G.R.F., A.M.W., P.H.W., and V.R.
wrote the paper.
*P.H.W. and V.R. contributed equally to this work.
This work was supported by Grant 8762754 of the Kommission fuer Klinische Forschung at the Klinikum Rechts
der Isar (to V.R.). We are grateful to our subjects and our colleagues at the Institute of Neurocience and Medicine,
Research Centre Jülich.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to either of the following: Peter H. Weiss, Cognitive Neurology Section,
Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Research Centre Jülich, Leo-Brandt-Strasse 5, 52425 Jülich, Germany,
E-mail: P.H.Weiss@fz-juelich.de; or Valentin Riedl, Department of Neuroradiology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Ismaningerstrasse 22, 81675 Munich, Germany, E-mail: valentin.riedl@mytum.de.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5401-11.2012
Copyright © 2012 the authors 0270-6474/12/327614-08$15.00/0

	  

morphometric data revealed structural changes in similar brain
regions (Rouw and Scholte, 2007, 2010; Jäncke et al., 2009; Weiss
and Fink, 2009; Hänggi et al., 2011). These morphometric
changes suggest altered connectivity in brain networks of primary sensory and higher cognitive integration areas already in
the resting state, i.e., when no synesthesia-inducing stimulus is
present. However, the hypothesized hyperconnectivity in synesthesia has so far been mainly explored at the structural level. For
example, a recent diffusion tensor imaging study revealed regionally increased structural connectivity in inferior temporal, parietal, and frontal cortices of grapheme– color synesthetes (Rouw
and Scholte, 2007).
In this study, we tested whether similar differences also occur
in the functional network architecture of the resting synesthetic
brain. We therefore investigated intrinsic functional connectivity
(FC) of brain networks with resting-state functional magnetic
resonance imaging (rs-fMRI). Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations of the blood-oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal can
be temporally correlated across functionally related brain areas
(Biswal et al., 1995; Fox and Raichle, 2007) and may thereby form
intrinsic connectivity networks (ICN). ICNs consistently occur
in healthy subjects and show strong correspondence to structural
networks (Damoiseaux et al., 2006; Honey et al., 2007). However,
deviations from this consistent architecture of intrinsic connectivity networks also occur. Neuropsychiatric patients with altered
experiences or impaired cognitive functions, like in schizophrenia or Alzheimer’s disease, show characteristic changes of intrinsic FC in several ICNs (Greicius et al., 2004; Jafri et al., 2008;

40	  

Dovern et al. • Functional Hyperconnectivity in Synesthesia

Vercammen et al., 2010; Gour et al., 2011). In analogy, the additional (abnormal) experiences of synesthetes may be reflected in
an altered intrinsic FC. Thus, we hypothesized that (1) grapheme–
color synesthetes show specific patterns of functional hyperconnectivity at rest and (2) this hyperconnectivity correlates with the
consistency of synesthetic experiences. To test these hypotheses, we
investigated the intrinsic FC of synesthesia-related brain networks of
coherent ongoing neuronal activity with independent component
analysis (ICA) (Fox and Raichle, 2007; Biswal et al., 2010; Schölvinck
et al., 2010) and with an additional seed-based FC approach for the
cytoarchitectonically defined color area V4.

Materials and Methods
Subjects. In the current study, 12 grapheme– color synesthetes and 12
control subjects without a history of neurological or psychiatric disease
were investigated. The two groups were matched for gender (10 female in
each group), age [synesthetes: 32.6 ⫾ 9.9 years (mean ⫾ SD); controls:
30.6 ⫾ 5.7 years; t(22) ⫽ 0.611, p ⫽ 0.55], handedness as assessed by the
Oldfield handedness inventory (Oldfield, 1971) (3 subjects with lefthand and 9 subjects with right-hand preference in each group; laterality
quotient: synesthetes: 38.7 ⫾ 77.6; controls: 41.3 ⫾ 74; t(22) ⫽ ⫺0.084,
p ⫽ 0.93), and IQ as assessed by the Mehrfachwahl-Wortschatz Intelligence Test type B (Lehrl et al., 1995) (synesthetes: 117.6 ⫾ 10.3; controls:
113.9 ⫾ 11.1; t(20) ⫽ 0.817, p ⫽ 0.42).
Authenticity of synesthesia was verified by applying a test of consistency (Baron-Cohen et al., 1993) in which synesthetic color experiences
for 129 items were retested without warning after at least 6 months
(15.2 ⫾ 12.4 months) in all synesthetes (Weiss et al., 2005). This test
confirmed the high consistency of the synesthetic color experiences in the
12 grapheme– color synesthetes (rate of consistent responses: 84.8 ⫾
14.5%). All but one grapheme– color synesthete reported also having
phoneme– color synesthesia, i.e., sounds of single phonemes also trigger synesthetic color experiences. The local ethics committee of the Medical Faculty
of the Rheinisch-Westfaelische Technische Hochschule) Aachen University
approved the study and all subjects gave written informed consent.
fMRI data acquisition. Subjects were instructed to keep their eyes
closed but remain alert and awake during the resting-state measurements
in the scanner. Resting-state data were acquired on a 3-tesla MRI System
(Trio; Siemens) using a standard echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence to
obtain standard T2*-weighted EPI images with BOLD contrast (field of
view, 200 mm; matrix size, 64 ⫻ 64; voxel size, 3.1 ⫻ 3.1 ⫻ 3.0 mm 3). A
total of 280 functional volumes of 36 3-mm-thick axial slices were collected sequentially with a 0.3 mm gap for each subject within a single
scanning session (repetition time, 2.2 s; echo time, 30 ms; total duration,
⬃10 min). The first six EPI volumes were discarded to allow for T1
equilibration effects. Standard preprocessing procedures were applied to
the remaining 274 EPI images using Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM5; Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London,
UK; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm5/).
Independent component analysis. ICA is a method that can be used to
decompose fMRI data into spatially independent components, each
comprising a spatial map of functionally connected brain regions and an
associated time course. In the current study, ICA was used to identify
synesthesia-relevant ICNs and to assess differential functional intranetwork and internetwork connectivity in grapheme– color synesthetes and
control subjects.
Before the volumes were entered into the ICA, we applied a voxelwise
z-transformation (ŷijk(t)) on the time course data yijk(t) by subtracting
the mean ⬍yijk⬎ and dividing by the standard deviation ␴ijk: ŷijk(t) ⫽
( yijk(t) ⫺ ⬍yijk⬎)/␴ijk (t is time; indices i, j, k represent the three directions in space). The sensitivity of the multivariate ICA algorithm for
correlation of variance between voxels, i.e., functional connectivity, was
thereby rendered independent of the original BOLD signal magnitude
across subjects (Sorg et al., 2007).
To obtain the most robust and comparable set of independent components from the resting-state fMRI dataset, we performed a spatial
group ICA on the combined, concatenated dataset of synesthetes and
controls (n ⫽ 24) using GIFT software (http://icatb.sourceforge.net/,

J. Neurosci., May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621 • 7615

version 2.0 d) and iteratively ran 30 ICAs using the ICASSO procedure
(Himberg et al., 2004). We calculated 25 independent components according to the minimum description length criteria that can be implemented in GIFT (Calhoun et al., 2001). The analysis was performed in
three steps (Calhoun et al., 2001): data reduction with principal component analysis (PCA), ICA using the Infomax algorithm on the concatenated dataset of all subjects (including both synesthetes and controls),
and finally back-reconstruction of the group independent components
into the single-subject space using GICA3 (Erhardt et al., 2011). Each
independent component was composed of a spatially independent brain
map and an associated time course of ongoing fMRI fluctuations during
rest. We selected functionally relevant ICNs from the whole set of independent components by applying a multiple spatial regression analysis
against brain templates comprising synesthesia-related brain regions that
were created with the anatomy toolbox (Eickhoff et al., 2005). The brain
regions assumed to be critically involved in synesthetic experiences were
derived from previous functional and structural imaging studies (Nunn
et al., 2002; Hubbard et al., 2005; Weiss et al., 2005; Rouw and Scholte,
2007; Weiss and Fink, 2009; Rouw and Scholte, 2010) and covered the
visual, auditory, and intraparietal cortices. The anatomy toolbox by Eickhoff and colleagues (2005) was used to build spatial masks covering these
three brain regions. The visual mask included area 17, area 18, hOC3v
(V3v), hOC4 (V4), and hOC5 (V5); the auditory mask included areas TE
1.0, TE 1.1, and TE 1.2; and the intraparietal mask comprised the areas
hIP1, hIP2, and hIP3. A threshold of beta ⬎ 1 for at least one of the three
spatial variables was determined to select synesthesia-relevant ICNs. In
addition, a separate group ICA was applied to each of the two groups
using identical parameters as in the combined (controls and synesthetes)
approach. This procedure validated the presence of all synesthesiarelevant ICNs in both the synesthetes and the control subjects in independent analyses.
To analyze group differences of within-network connectivity, we entered spatial maps of individual ICNs of the combined group ICA into an
ANOVA with the factors subject, group, component, and a group ⫻
component interaction using SPM5. Contrasts were masked by conjunction maps of the one-sample t test (FWE corrected, p ⬍ 0.05; Fig. 1, left)
of the respective network and thresholded at p ⬍ 0.05, FWE corrected at
the voxel level. Finally, each individual subject’s FC between the
synesthesia-relevant ICNs was derived by calculating pairwise zero-lag
correlation coefficients between the BOLD signal time courses of the
synesthesia-relevant ICNs. We performed this functional network connectivity (FNC) analysis using the FNC Matlab toolbox (version 2.3)
(Jafri et al., 2008).
Seed-based correlation analysis for the cytoarchitectonically defined color
area V4. To complement the ICA results by an independent approach, we
performed a seed-based correlation analysis by calculating the FC from
cytoarchitectonically defined color area V4 to all other voxels of the
brain. The bilateral V4 seed regions were created using the Anatomy
Toolbox (Eickhoff et al., 2005). The REST toolkit (Song et al., 2011) was
used for removing the linear trend of time courses from the data, temporal bandpass filtering of the data (0.01– 0.1 Hz), and calculating the
individual FC maps. Finally, a Fisher’s z transformation was used to
normalize the individual correlation maps to z maps. Then, for each
group, the Fisher’s z maps were entered into a separate one-sample t test
(using SPM5) to identify regions showing significant FC with color area
V4. A height threshold of p ⬍ 0.05 (FWE corrected) and an extent threshold of 50 voxels were applied to the one-sample t tests. Moreover, z maps
were entered into a two-sample t test to detect significant group differences between synesthetes and controls. The two-sample t test was
masked by the conjunction map of the one-sample t tests (FWE corrected; height threshold, p ⬍ 0.05; extent threshold, 50 voxels) of synesthetes and control subjects. Again, a height threshold of p ⬍ 0.05 (FWE
corrected) was applied.

Results
Independent component analysis
We identified seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs in a multiple spatial regression analysis using three spatial priors (visual cortex,
auditory cortex, and intraparietal cortex): medial and lateral vi-

Dovern et al. • Functional Hyperconnectivity in Synesthesia

7616 • J. Neurosci., May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621

Figure 1. Illustration of the seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs revealed by the combined and separate group ICAs. Seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs were identified by ICA and spatial regression
analysis (for further details, see Materials and Methods). Results of the one-sample t tests on the individual subjects ICN patterns are visualized on axial, sagittal, or coronal sections of the standard
brain template provided by SPM5. Due to differences in statistical power, a threshold of p ⬍ 0.05, FWE corrected, was applied for the combined group ICA, while the within-group ICA results for both
groups are shown for a height threshold of p ⬍ 0.05, FDR corrected, and an extent threshold of 50 voxels.

sual network, auditory network, left and right frontoparietal network, and medial and lateral parietal network (Fig. 1; Tables 1, 2).
These ICNs strongly resemble previously described ICNs involved in sensory and cognitive processing (Smith et al., 2009).
Figure 1 illustrates that all synesthesia-relevant ICNs from the
combined group analysis were also detected by separate ICAs of
each group. In addition to this qualitative assessment, we also
quantified group differences of within-network connectivity in
an ANOVA between grapheme– color synesthetes and control
subjects. This ANOVA revealed regions with significantly stronger functional connectivity for synesthetes compared with controls for all networks of interest, while only the left and right
frontoparietal networks also included regions showing stronger
functional connectivity in the control subjects (Table 3). Note
that the within-network differences between groups were limited
to rather small clusters.
We nest investigated group differences of network connectivity between the seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs. This FNC
analysis revealed clear differences in the intrinsic network architecture between grapheme– color synesthetes and control subjects. For the control group, only five significant connections
emerged (as indexed by significant correlations between the time
courses of the seven ICNs, one-sample t tests, two-sided, p ⬍

Table 1. Results of the multiple spatial regression analysis conducted to identify
synesthesia-relevant ICNs to be included in the FNC analysis
Betas
Multiple
Auditory Intraparietal
regression
ICN
mask
mask
Visual mask value
number Label of ICNs
1
18
12
16
25
19
21
3
—
—
—
11

Medial visual network
Auditory network
Lateral visual network
Left frontoparietal network
Lateral parietal network
Medial parietal network
Right frontoparietal network

⫺0.12433
3.53987
⫺0.11789
⫺0.06476
⫺0.01792
⫺0.02189
⫺0.03788
0.01709
—
—
—
⫺0.00122

⫺0.00555
0.01085
⫺0.01240
1.70691
1.06765
1.07975
1.01988
0.03890
—
—
—
⫺0.02028

1.81960
⫺0.18998
1.02344
⫺0.05126
⫺0.02037
0.08141
⫺0.03213
⫺0.24333
—
—
—
⫺0.01598

0.30953
0.13207
0.09962
0.05326
0.02193
0.02109
0.01828
0.00560
—
—
—
0.00003

Only components with a beta ⬎1 (bold) on at least one of the three spatial variables were subjected to the FNC
analysis to ensure that only ICNs that covered at least one of the synesthesia-relevant brain regions (visual cortex,
auditory cortex, and intraparietal cortex) were included. This threshold is represented in the table by the line. Note
that already the betas of the next ICN in the table (arbitrarily numbered “3”) are far from the critical value 1,
indicating that this and all the other ICNs (with even lower betas) do not contain significant parts of the synesthesiarelevant brain regions.

Dovern et al. • Functional Hyperconnectivity in Synesthesia

J. Neurosci., May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621 • 7617

Table 2. Brain regions belonging to the seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs
MNI coordinates
Cluster size
Region
Hemisphere (voxels)
t value x
y
z
Medial visual network
Calcarine gyrus
Calcarine gyrus
Thalamus
Thalamus
Superior medial gyrus
Lateral visual network
Fusiform gyrus
Fusiform gyrus
Insula
Auditory network
Superior temporal gyrus; TE
1.2
Superior temporal gyrus; TE
1.2
Middle cingulate cortex
Left frontoparietal network
Inferior frontal gyrus
Inferior parietal lobule
Insula
Posterior cingulate cortex
Inferior temporal gyrus
Thalamus
Middle frontal gyrus
Precuneus
Right frontoparietal network
Inferior frontal gyrus
Inferior parietal lobule
Precuneus
Superior parietal lobule
Middle temporal gyrus
Insula
Thalamus
Inferior parietal lobule
Lateral parietal network
Supramarginal gyrus
Supramarginal gyrus
Middle cingulate cortex
Insula
Insula
Inferior temporal gyrus
Inferior temporal gyrus
Inferior frontal gyrus
Inferior frontal gyrus
Medial parietal network
Cuneus
Cuneus
Posterior cingulate cortex
Posterior cingulate cortex
Midbrain

Table 3. Within-network differences between synesthetes and controls
MNI coordinates
Cluster size Max. t
Hemisphere (voxels)
value x
y
z

⫺69
⫺72
⫺21
⫺15
36

6
9
12
9
45

27 ⫺69
⫺21 ⫺78
42
9

⫺9
⫺9
6

54

⫺3

0

17.6

⫺54

⫺9

0

78

10.2

⫺9

3

39

L
L
L
L
L
L
R
L

1591
721
69
67
67
65
50
40

20.4
18.4
17.0
11.9
9.5
10.2
8.6
9.1

⫺48
⫺51
⫺33
⫺3
⫺51
⫺6
48
⫺6

30
⫺39
18
⫺36
⫺54
⫺15
36
⫺51

18
45
0
33
⫺9
9
21
15

R
R
R
R
R
R
R
L

1909
756
151
48
33
30
29
17

14.5
18.6
12.4
7.5
9.7
6.6
9.3
7.6

45
51
6
15
63
39
9
⫺42

33
⫺54
⫺42
⫺72
⫺27
21
⫺24
⫺51

27
39
45
54
⫺9
⫺3
12
42

L
R
L
R
L
L
R
L
R

2615*

19.1
13.6
12.0
10.1
9.3
10.6
10.0
9.2
8.0

⫺54
57
⫺6
42
⫺42
⫺54
54
⫺54
54

⫺27
33
⫺30
33
0
42
⫺3
6
⫺3
9
⫺63 ⫺12
⫺54 ⫺6
9
24
9
24

R
L
R
L
M

2445*

20.8
15.5
8.3
8.0
8.4

15
⫺15
6
⫺6
0

⫺69
⫺69
⫺42
⫺45
⫺27

R
L
R
L
M

2217*

R
L
R

2677*
61

24.1
19.6
9.2

R

1697

19.0

L

1521

L

261*
180

122
108
100
30
25
27
14**

210*
22

23.5
21.7
12.6
10.7
11.4

12
⫺3
12
⫺6
0

33
36
24
18
⫺9

One-sample t test, p ⬍ 0.05, FWE corrected. Note that only clusters including at least 15 voxels are listed. Anatomical
locations and terms were derived from the Anatomy toolbox (Eickhoff et al., 2005). *These voxels belong to a
contiguous bilateral cluster. **Although this cluster just missed the predefined threshold of 15 voxels, it was included in the table as it reflects the bilateral organization of the lateral parietal ICN.

0.05, FDR corrected; Fig. 2A). In stark contrast, 15 significant
connections between the seven ICNs were present in the synesthetes (one-sample t tests, two-sided, p ⬍ 0.05, FDR corrected;
Fig. 2 B). Note that all significant connections observed in controls were also present in the synesthetes (Fig. 2 A, B, black lines).
Thus, the global functional network architecture in synesthesia
consisted of the intrinsic nonsynesthetic network connectivity
plus additional intrinsic connections (Fig. 2 B, double lines). Specifically, the integration of the two visual ICNs into the network
architecture was clearly different between controls and synesthetes: while the visual networks were only interconnected (and

Synesthetes ⬎ controls
Lateral visual network
Auditory network

R
L
L
Left frontoparietal network L
L
L
Right frontoparietal
R
R
network
Medial parietal network
R
Lateral parietal network
L
L
Controls ⬎ synesthetes
Left frontoparietal network L
Right frontoparietal
R
R
network

⫺60 ⫺3
⫺9
3
⫺27 18
21 45
0 60
33 15
12 39
6 54
⫺57 33
⫺36 42
⫺39 48

5
3
2
37
5
3
17
13
2
12
2

4.46
5.47
4.62
7.5
5.38
4.39
6.4
5.25
4.61
5.82
5.02

15
⫺57
⫺39
⫺6
⫺33
⫺39
42
24
18
⫺33
⫺33

6
37
2

4.91
8.06
4.66

⫺39
6
39 ⫺42
6
39

48
36
45

Please note that single voxels are not listed in the table. Also note that there was a higher significant FC in the medial
visual network in synesthetes compared to controls, although limited to two single voxels. All reported results are
significant at p ⬍ 0.05 (FWE corrected).

not connected to any other ICN) in controls, these two networks
were highly interconnected with the other ICNs in the grapheme– color synesthetes.
In addition to these global differences of the intrinsic network
architecture between synesthetes and control subjects (i.e., three
times more significant connections in the synesthetes), the direct
group comparison revealed that two specific network connections were significantly stronger in the grapheme– color synesthetes (two-sample t tests, two-sided, p ⬍ 0.05, FDR corrected):
these were the connections between the medial ( p ⫽ 0.0024) and
lateral ( p ⫽ 0.0022) visual networks and the right frontoparietal
network (Fig. 2 B, gray lines). In addition, the connection between the lateral visual and auditory network showed a trend
toward significance ( p ⫽ 0.05).
To test whether the increased FNC determined the consistency of synesthetic experiences, correlation analysis was performed with the individual consistency scores and the strength of
the three functional network connections that differed between
synesthetes and controls. In synesthetes, the connection strength
of the lateral visual ICN with both the auditory ICN ( p ⫽ 0.006)
and the right frontoparietal ICN ( p ⫽ 0.03) significantly correlated with the consistency scores (Fig. 2C). No significant correlation was found for the connection between the medial visual
and right frontoparietal ICNs ( p ⫽ 0.10).
Seed-based correlation analysis for the cytoarchitectonically
defined color area V4
One-sample t tests based on the z-transformed individual FC
maps revealed that in grapheme– color synesthetes, color area V4
showed a significant FC with other synesthesia-relevant regions,
namely primary and secondary visual areas, auditory cortex bilateral, and right parietal cortex, while in control subjects, V4 was
also functionally connected to primary and secondary visual areas but showed no FC with the auditory cortices and the right
parietal cortex (Fig. 3; Table 4). Thus, the seed-based correlation
analysis confirmed the FNC analysis results of a significantly increased intrinsic FC between the lateral visual network (including
the color area V4) and the bilateral auditory network as well as the
right frontoparietal network in synesthetes compared with controls (Fig. 2 B). However, the differences in the seed-based correlation patterns between synesthetes and controls did not survive

Dovern et al. • Functional Hyperconnectivity in Synesthesia

7618 • J. Neurosci., May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621

the predefined statistical threshold ( p ⬍
0.05, FWE corrected) when assessed by a
two-sample t test.

Discussion
Supporting neurobiological models of
synesthesia that hypothesize increased
connectivity in grapheme– color synesthetes (Hubbard and Ramachandran,
2005), the current rs-fMRI study reveals
increased intrinsic functional connectivity in grapheme– color synesthetes, complementing earlier findings of increased
structural connectivity in synesthesia
(Rouw and Scholte, 2007). Our results
thus complement the findings of previous
studies in nonsynesthetes showing the
structural correlates of intrinsic FC networks (Honey et al., 2007; Vincent et al.,
2007). Moreover, our results are in line
with a recent resting-state electroencephalography (EEG) study in which several
synesthesia-relevant brain regions revealed stronger functional connectivity in
lower frequencies of the theta and alpha band in colored– hearing synesthetes
compared with nonsynesthetic control
subjects (Jäncke and Langer, 2011). Such
connectivity changes in the low-frequency
band may well constitute the electrophysiological correlate for the low-frequency
BOLD fluctuations in resting state fMRI
data as suggested by simultaneous EEG–
fMRI studies (Laufs et al., 2003; Van de
Ville et al., 2010).
Applying a multiple spatial regression
analysis to the combined group ICA,
4

Figure 2. A, B, Illustration of the intrinsic network architecture in controls (A) and synesthetes (B) composed of coherent,
ongoing neuronal activity between seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs. C, Intrinsic network connectivity correlates with the

consistency of synesthetic experiences. By means of multiple
spatial regression analysis, the following seven synesthesiarelevant ICNs were selected for further correlation analyses in
an automated manner: three primary sensory ICNs (medial
and lateral visual network, auditory network), the right and
left frontoparietal ICN, and the medial and lateral parietal
ICNs. A, Significant pairwise correlations between the time
courses of the ICNs in both groups are represented by thick
black lines connecting the respective ICNs (one-sample t tests,
two-sided, p ⬍ 0.05, FDR corrected). B, Additional significant
connections in synesthetes are indicated by double lines (onesample t tests, two-sided, p ⬍ 0.05, FDR corrected). Gray lines
represent significant group differences, i.e., additional connections in synesthetes that are significantly stronger compared with the control group (two-sample t test, two-sided,
p ⬍ 0.05, uncorrected; * indicates group differences surviving
FDR correction). C, Correlation analyses between the functional connectivity and the consistency of synesthetic experiences (using the normalized scores for the three functional
connections that were significantly stronger in grapheme–
color synesthetes and the normalized consistency scores) revealed a significant correlation between the synesthetic
consistency scores and the intrinsic connectivity strength between the lateral visual and the auditory ICNs (r 2 ⫽ 0.49, p ⫽
0.006, left) and the lateral visual and the right frontoparietal
ICNs (r 2 ⫽ 0.29, p ⫽ 0.03, right).

Dovern et al. • Functional Hyperconnectivity in Synesthesia

J. Neurosci., May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621 • 7619

BOLD response in any region but maybe
subtle coactivations in distributed regions.” Thus, the current study strongly
supports Hupé et al.’s hypothesis that
“network analysis of brain connectivity
appears then as a promising approach to
elucidate principles underlying synesthesia” (Hupé et al., 2011, page 11).
With respect to the internetwork connectivity, the current study revealed increased global and specific intrinsic
functional network connectivity in synesthetic subjects. Here, “global” refers to the
overall increased amount of significant
connections between the seven investigated ICNs in the group of synesthetic
subjects compared with the nonsynesthetes. In contrast, “specific” refers to
Figure 3. A, B, Surface renderings of brain regions functionally connected with bilateral color area V4 in grapheme– color those connections for which a significant
synesthetes (A) and control subjects (B). The synesthesia-relevant brain regions (right parietal cortex and bilateral auditory group difference was revealed, emphasizcortices) that are functionally connected to color area V4 in synesthetes (A) but not control subjects (B) are circled. Please note that ing the relevance of these specific connecin
processing
synesthetic
also the functional connectivity of V4 with other primary and secondary visual areas was more pronounced in synesthetes. All tions
shown regions reached significance at p ⬍ 0.05 (FWE corrected, extent threshold 50 voxels).
experiences. With respect to the increased
global intrinsic network connectivity in
grapheme– color synesthesia, it is remarkable that all (five) sigTable 4. Regions functionally connected with bilateral color area V4 in synesthetes
and controls
nificant connections between the ICNs found in the control
group were also present in the synesthetic subjects. This observaMNI coordinates
Cluster size Max. t
tion is in line with the notion that synesthetes are healthy subjects
Hemi-sphere (voxels)
value X
y
z
without any neurological or psychiatric disease (Hubbard, 2007),
Synesthetes
but are endowed with additional competences. The finding that
Primary and secondary visual
L
4573*
32.67 ⫺27 ⫺87 ⫺9
the additional experiences of synesthetic subjects are associated
R
27 ⫺84 ⫺9
cortex
with an increased functional network connectivity is also in line
Auditory cortex
L
250
17.74 ⫺63 ⫺36
3
with a study by Jafri and colleagues (2008), who revealed an inR
336
16.55
66 ⫺21
6
creased functional network connectivity of the default mode netParietal cortex
R
58
13.40
24 ⫺54 57
work in schizophrenic patients and speculated that this increased
Controls
Primary and secondary visual
R
3506*
30.70
21 ⫺87 ⫺18
functional network connectivity was linked to their hallucinatory
L
⫺27 ⫺66 ⫺21
cortex
experiences. In contrast, reduced functional connectivity has
Medial frontal cortex
M
88
15.96
6 63 12
been shown in patients with psychiatric deficits resulting in limInferior temporal cortex
L
136
15.49 ⫺57 ⫺9 ⫺27
ited experiences [as in dementia (Greicius et al., 2004)]. HowCuneus
R
52
14.84
21 ⫺72 27
ever, with respect to this notion, the findings in the ICA literature
Superior parietal cortex
M
132
14.37
0 ⫺72 54
are inconclusive as the opposite pattern, i.e., decreased functional
*These voxels belong to a contiguous bilateral cluster. Note that the clusters in grapheme– color synesthetes are
connectivity in schizophrenia (Vercammen et al., 2010) and inmore extensive than in controls (Fig. 3). In contrast, control subjects show smaller, separable clusters.
creased functional connectivity in dementia (Gour et al., 2011),
has also been reported. Grapheme– color synesthetes showed not
we identified seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs whose intranetonly a threefold increase of global intrinsic network connectivity
work and internetwork connectivity was investigated. These
compared with controls, but also specific (quantitative) differseven ICNs were also identified in the separate within-group
ences in the intrinsic network connectivity: the two visual
ICAs, indicating a homogenous distribution of the ICNs in synICNs were significantly more strongly connected to the rightesthetes and controls. Consistent with the notion of functional
lateralized frontoparietal ICN in synesthetes compared with nonhyperconnectivity in grapheme– color synesthesia, the direct
synesthetes. This is in accordance with the known role of
group comparison of intranetwork connectivity differences refrontoparietal networks in color-form binding for normal pervealed regions showing significantly stronger intrinsic FC in synception (Donner et al., 2002) and previous studies reporting atesthetes than control subjects for all seven synesthesia-relevant
tenuation of synesthetic binding following transcranial magnetic
ICNs. In contrast, only two ICNs (i.e., the left and right frontostimulation of the right parietal cortex (Esterman et al., 2006;
parietal networks) contained regions with stronger FC in controls
Muggleton et al., 2007).
compared with synesthetes.
Moreover, the strength of the functional connectivity in the
The finding of increased intranetwork connectivity in synesresting state between the lateral visual, auditory, and right fronthetes is consistent with the results of a recent study by Hupé et al.
toparietal ICN were associated with the individual consistency of
(2011) that suggests that the joint coding of real and synesthetic
the synesthetic experiences. Recently, different patterns of effeccolors is distributed rather than localized in the visual cortex. In
tive connectivity were shown to be associated with the type of
fact, our findings are direct support for the assumption of Hupé
grapheme– color synesthesia (van Leeuwen et al., 2011). In
et al. (2011) that “. . . if synesthetic experience relies on connectprojectors, i.e., synesthetes experiencing the appearance of the
ing regions together, it does not necessarily involve a stronger
synesthetic color in external space (colocalized with the induc-

Dovern et al. • Functional Hyperconnectivity in Synesthesia

7620 • J. Neurosci., May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621

ing grapheme), the cross-activation of V4 was elicited by a
bottom-up pathway in the fusiform gyrus. In contrast, V4 crossactivation was evoked by a top-down process via the parietal lobe
in associators, i.e., synesthetes who experience the synesthetic
color internally, in their mind’s eye. Together, these data suggest
that the stability and characteristics of synesthetic experiences are
reflected by the degree of functional connectivity at rest and effective connectivity during the performance of tasks inducing
synesthetic color perceptions.
The seed-based correlation analysis revealed a significant
functional connectivity of bilateral color area V4 with the auditory cortex bilaterally and the right parietal cortex in synesthetes
but not in controls. Constituting an independent approach, the
seed-based correlation analysis confirmed our findings of the
FNC analysis of the seven synesthesia-relevant ICNs, as this analysis also revealed an increased internetwork connectivity between
the lateral visual network (including color area V4) with the auditory network and the right frontoparietal network.
Although the converging results of the seed-based correlation
and the FNC analyses show the potential of resting-state fMRI for
assessing functional connectivity by different approaches, there
are also limitations to this method. For example, some authors
related the connectivity of networks covering midline and brainstem structures, at least in part, to pulsation artifacts (Birn et al.,
2008). Moreover, it needs to be noted that during resting-state
fMRI, sensory input (e.g., scanner noise) is present. Nevertheless,
as our main findings are unrelated to midline or brainstem structures and our synesthetes did not report synesthetic experiences
triggered by the scanner noise, it is unlikely that these aspects
have confounded the current results.
Our data, together with previous data showing structural differences and differences in functional network characteristics between synesthetes and nonsynesthetes at rest (Rouw and Scholte,
2007, 2010; Jäncke et al., 2009; Weiss and Fink, 2009; Hänggi et
al., 2011; Jäncke and Langer, 2011), indicate that there are general
differences between the brains of synesthetes and nonsynesthetes
even when no synesthesia-inducing stimuli are present. We suggest that these structural and functional differences predispose
the synesthetes’ brains to elicit synesthetic experience in response
to particular inducer stimuli. One should keep in mind, however,
that these structural and functional differences might occur as a
result of the synesthetic experiences rather than causing them.
The latter possibility can only be examined by longitudinal studies preferentially performed in synesthetic and nonsynesthetic
children (Simner et al., 2009).
A further important step is to investigate the functional network architecture during the actual perception of synesthetic experiences. First evidence for increased functional connectivity in
this context is provided by Specht and Laeng (2011), who showed
an increased coherence of the color area V4 with a perceptual
network during a single letter stroop task in two grapheme– color
synesthetes (compared with 10 control subjects). Such taskrelated ICA analysis should be replicated in a larger group of
synesthetes and should be complemented with an FNC analysis.
Our data on globally and specifically increased intrinsic network connectivity in grapheme– color synesthetes may help to
inform the current debate whether hyperconnectivity in synesthesia occurs either locally, i.e., within circumscribed anatomical
regions (Hubbard, 2007), or globally, i.e., widespread throughout the brain (Bargary and Mitchell, 2008). Previous studies investigating structural alterations in grapheme– color synesthetes
provided (equivocal) evidence for either type of (structural) hyperconnectivity in synesthesia: structural differences between

synesthetes and controls emerged either at the local (Rouw and
Scholte, 2007, 2010; Weiss and Fink, 2009) or at the global
(Jäncke et al., 2009; Hänggi et al., 2011) level. Our functional
connectivity data suggest that a combination of both models
most appropriately characterizes grapheme– color synesthetes
since they differ functionally from nonsynesthetes at both levels,
i.e., at a global level (i.e., overall increased number of significant
ICNs in synesthetes compared with controls) and a specific level
(i.e., significantly increased FC between some specific ICNs).
Furthermore, the current finding stress the importance of investigating both global and specific functional network connectivity
in clinical populations to properly characterize the pathophysiological changes in the network architecture caused by schizophrenia, dementia, or other systemic diseases.

References
Bargary G, Mitchell KJ (2008) Synaesthesia and cortical connectivity.
Trends Neurosci 31:335–342.
Baron-Cohen S, Harrison J, Goldstein LH, Wyke M (1993) Coloured speech
perception: is synaesthesia what happens when modularity breaks down?
Perception 22:419 – 426.
Birn RM, Murphy K, Bandettini PA (2008) The effect of respiration variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional connectivity. Hum Brain Mapp 29:740 –750.
Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS (1995) Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
Magn Reson Med 34:537–541.
Biswal BB, Mennes M, Zuo XN, Gohel S, Kelly C, Smith SM, Beckmann CF,
Adelstein JS, Buckner RL, Colcombe S, Dogonowski AM, Ernst M, Fair D,
Hampson M, Hoptman MJ, Hyde JS, Kiviniemi VJ, Kötter R, Li SJ, Lin
CP, et al. (2010) Toward discovery science of human brain function.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:4734 – 4739.
Calhoun VD, Adali T, Pearlson GD, Pekar JJ (2001) A method for making
group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis. Hum Brain Mapp 14:140 –151.
Damoiseaux JS, Rombouts SA, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, Stam CJ, Smith SM,
Beckmann CF (2006) Consistent resting-state networks across healthy
subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:13848 –13853.
Donner TH, Kettermann A, Diesch E, Ostendorf F, Villringer A, Brandt SA
(2002) Visual feature and conjunction searches of equal difficulty engage
only partially overlapping frontoparietal networks. Neuroimage 15:
16 –25.
Eickhoff SB, Stephan KE, Mohlberg H, Grefkes C, Fink GR, Amunts K, Zilles
K (2005) A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data. Neuroimage 25:1325–1335.
Erhardt EB, Rachakonda S, Bedrick EJ, Allen EA, Adali T, Calhoun VD
(2011) Comparison of multi-subject ICA methods for analysis of fMRI
data. Hum Brain Mapp 32:2075–2095.
Esterman M, Verstynen T, Ivry RB, Robertson LC (2006) Coming unbound: disrupting automatic integratin of synaesthetic color and graphemes by transcranial magnetic stimulation of the right parietal lobe.
J Cogn Neurosci 18:1570 –1576.
Fox MD, Raichle ME (2007) Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci
8:700 –711.
Gour N, Ranjeva JP, Ceccaldi M, Confort-Gouny S, Barbeau E, Soulier E,
Guye M, Didic M, Felician O (2011) Basal functional connectivity
within the anterior temporal network is associated with performance on
declarative memory tasks. Neuroimage 58:687– 697.
Greicius MD, Srivastava G, Reiss AL, Menon V (2004) Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:4637– 4642.
Hänggi J, Wotruba D, Jäncke L (2011) Globally altered structural brain network topology in grapheme-color synesthesia. J Neurosci 31:5816 –5828.
Himberg J, Hyvärinen A, Esposito F (2004) Validating the independent
components of neuroimaging time series via clustering and visualization.
Neuroimage 22:1214 –1222.
Honey CJ, Kötter R, Breakspear M, Sporns O (2007) Network structure of
cerebral cortex shapes functional connectivity on multiple time scales.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:10240 –10245.

Dovern et al. • Functional Hyperconnectivity in Synesthesia
Hubbard EM (2007) Neurophysiology of synesthesia. Curr Psychiatry Rep
9:193–199.
Hubbard EM, Ramachandran VS (2005) Neurocognitive mechanisms of
synesthesia. Neuron 48:509 –520.
Hubbard EM, Arman AC, Ramachandran VS, Boynton GM (2005) Individual differences among grapheme-color synesthetes: brain-behavior correlations. Neuron 45:975–985.
Hupé JM, Bordier C, Dojat M (2011) The neural bases of grapheme-color synesthesia are not localized in real color-sensitive areas. Cereb Cortex. Advance
online publication. Retrieved March 31, 2012. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhr236.
Jafri MJ, Pearlson GD, Stevens M, Calhoun VD (2008) A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state
components in schizophrenia. Neuroimage 39:1666 –1681.
Jäncke L, Langer N (2011) A strong parietal hub in the small-world network
of coloured-hearing synaesthetes during resting state EEG. J Neuropsychol 5:178 –202.
Jäncke L, Beeli G, Eulig C, Hänggi J (2009) The neuroanatomy of grapheme– color synesthesia. Eur J Neurosci 29:1287–1293.
Laufs H, Krakow K, Sterzer P, Eger E, Beyerle A, Salek-Haddadi A, Kleinschmidt A (2003) Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional
and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at
rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:11053–11058.
Lehrl S, Triebig G, Fischer B (1995) Multiple choice vocabulary test MWT as
a valid and short test to estimate premorbid intelligence. Acta Neurol
Scand 91:335–345.
Muggleton N, Tsakanikos E, Walsh V, Ward J (2007) Disruption of synaesthesia following TMS of the right posterior parietal cortex. Neuropsychologia 45:1582–1585.
Nunn JA, Gregory LJ, Brammer M, Williams SC, Parslow DM, Morgan MJ,
Morris RG, Bullmore ET, Baron-Cohen S, Gray JA (2002) Functional
magnetic resonance imaging of synaesthesia: activation of V4/V8 by spoken words. Nat Neurosci 5:371–375.
Oldfield RC (1971) The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia 9:97–113.
Rouw R, Scholte HS (2007) Increased structural connectivity in graphemecolor synesthesia. Nat Neurosci 10:792–797.
Rouw R, Scholte HS (2010) Neural basis of individual differences in synesthetic experiences. J Neurosci 30:6205– 6213.

J. Neurosci., May 30, 2012 • 32(22):7614 –7621 • 7621
Schölvinck ML, Maier A, Ye FQ, Duyn JH, Leopold DA (2010) Neural basis
of global resting-state fMRI activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107:10238 –10243.
Simner J, Harrold J, Creed H, Monro L, Foulkes L (2009) Early detection of
markers for synaesthesia in childhood populations. Brain 132:57– 64.
Smith SM, Fox PT, Miller KL, Glahn DC, Fox PM, Mackay CE, Filippini N,
Watkins KE, Toro R, Laird AR, Beckmann CF (2009) Correspondence
of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 106:13040 –13045.
Song XW, Dong ZY, Long XY, Li SF, Zuo XN, Zhu CZ, He Y, Yan CG, Zang
YF (2011) REST: a toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing. PLoS One 6:e25031.
Sorg C, Riedl V, Mühlau M, Calhoun VD, Eichele T, Läer L, Drzezga A, Förstl
H, Kurz A, Zimmer C, Wohlschläger AM (2007) Selective changes of
resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:18760 –18765.
Specht K, Laeng B (2011) An independent component analysis of fMRI data
of grapheme-colour synaesthesia. J Neuropsychol 5:203–213.
Van de Ville D, Britz J, Michel CM (2010) EEG microstate sequences in
healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 107:18179 –18184.
van Leeuwen TM, den Ouden HE, Hagoort P (2011) Effective connectivity
determines the nature of subjective experience in grapheme-color synesthesia. J Neurosci 31:9879 –9884.
Vercammen A, Knegtering H, den Boer JA, Liemburg EJ, Aleman A (2010)
Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced
functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area. Biol Psychiatry
67:912–918.
Vincent JL, Patel GH, Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Baker JT, Van Essen DC, Zempel
JM, Snyder LH, Corbetta M, Raichle ME (2007) Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain. Nature 447:83– 86.
Weiss PH, Fink GR (2009) Grapheme-colour synaesthetes show increased
grey matter volumes of parietal and fusiform cortex. Brain 132:65–70.
Weiss PH, Shah NJ, Toni I, Zilles K, Fink GR (2001) Associating colours
with people: a case of chromatic-lexical synaesthesia. Cortex 37:750 –753.
Weiss PH, Zilles K, Fink GR (2005) When visual perception causes feeling:
enhanced cross-modal processing in grapheme– color synesthesia. Neuroimage 28:859 – 868.

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

10 Paper	  4:	  Selective	  changes	  of	  resting-­‐state	  networks	  in	  individuals	  at	  risk	  for	  Alzheimer’s	  disease	  
(PNAS	  2007)	  

Selective changes of resting-state networks
in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease
Christian Sorg*†, Valentin Riedl‡§, Mark Mühlau‡, Vince D. Calhoun¶!, Tom Eichele**, Leonhard Läer††,
Alexander Drzezga‡‡, Hans Förstl*, Alexander Kurz*, Claus Zimmer††, and Afra M. Wohlschläger‡††‡‡
Departments of *Psychiatry, ‡Neurology, ††Neuroradiology, and ‡‡Nuclear Medicine, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München,
Ismaningerstrasse 22, 81675 Munich, Germany; ¶MIND Institute, 1101 Yale Boulevard, Albuquerque, NM 87131; !Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131; **Cognitive Neuroscience Group, Faculty of Psychology,
University of Bergen, Jonas Lies Vei 91, 5011 Bergen, Norway; and §Munich Center for Neurosciences, Brain and Mind, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität;
Grosshadernerstrasse 2, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Edited by Leslie G. Ungerleider, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, and approved September 25, 2007 (received for review September 17, 2007)

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that
prominently affects cerebral connectivity. Assessing the functional
connectivity at rest, recent functional MRI (fMRI) studies reported
on the existence of resting-state networks (RSNs). RSNs are characterized by spatially coherent, spontaneous fluctuations in the
blood oxygen level-dependent signal and are made up of regional
patterns commonly involved in functions such as sensory, attention, or default mode processing. In AD, the default mode network
(DMN) is affected by reduced functional connectivity and atrophy.
In this work, we analyzed functional and structural MRI data from
healthy elderly (n ! 16) and patients with amnestic mild cognitive
impairment (aMCI) (n ! 24), a syndrome of high risk for developing
AD. Two questions were addressed: (i) Are any RSNs altered in
aMCI? (ii) Do changes in functional connectivity relate to possible
structural changes? Independent component analysis of restingstate fMRI data identified eight spatially consistent RSNs. Only
selected areas of the DMN and the executive attention network
demonstrated reduced network-related activity in the patient
group. Voxel-based morphometry revealed atrophy in both medial
temporal lobes (MTL) of the patients. The functional connectivity
between both hippocampi in the MTLs and the posterior cingulate
of the DMN was present in healthy controls but absent in patients.
We conclude that in individuals at risk for AD, a specific subset of
RSNs is altered, likely representing effects of ongoing early neurodegeneration. We interpret our finding as a proof of principle,
demonstrating that functional brain disorders can be characterized
by functional-disconnectivity profiles of RSNs.
default mode network " intrinsic brain activity " mild cognitive impairment

A

lzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder
clinically characterized by progressive dementia and neuropsychiatric symptoms (1). AD is neuropathologically defined
by tau pathology and amyloid aggregations (2). Tau pathology
starts in regions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) and is well
correlated with cell loss and atrophy; amyloid deposition primarily affects distributed neocortical regions but is not especially
prominent in the MTL (2, 3). Atrophy of the MTL is correlated
with the degree of dementia and also the extent of temporoparietal hypometabolism; both results are assumed to reflect
changes in cerebral connectivity, especially between the MTL
and the neocortex (3–5). In non-human primates, prominent
structural connectivity between the MTL and neocortical regions as well as broad neocortical hypometabolism after ablation
of parts of the MTL were demonstrated (6, 7). Evidence for
disrupted structural and functional connectivity (FC) further
suggests that AD includes a disconnection syndrome (5, 8–10).
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a syndrome with cognitive decline greater than expected for an individual’s age and
educational level but not interfering notably with activities of
daily living; prevalence of MCI is !15% in adults older than 65
years; more than half of patients with MCI progress to dementia
within 5 years; the amnestic subtype of MCI has a high risk of

18760 –18765 " PNAS " November 20, 2007 " vol. 104 " no. 47

progression to AD constituting a prodromal stage of AD (1, 11,
12). Previous results of task-related functional MRI (fMRI) in
patients with MCI (13, 14) indicate that FC seems to be already
impaired in prodromal stages of AD (15). Reduced white matter
volumes of the MTL in amnestic MCI (aMCI) point at changed
MTL–neocortex connectivity (16). Very recent fMRI studies in
AD reported on FC changes especially during rest (5, 9, 17).
Together, these findings suggest that the functional integration
of brain areas in the cerebral resting state in individuals at risk
for AD is disturbed and that functional changes are related to
MTL atrophy.
The study of intrinsic brain activity may be central for understanding the physiology of functional brain disorders (5, 18–20).
Functional brain disorders such as AD, schizophrenia, or autism
are characterized by structural alterations that are subtle or have
an uncertain relationship to clinical symptoms (21). Such structural lesions might be functionally related to alterations of
intrinsic brain activity that are reflected by changes of connectivity (18, 19). Here, the study of spontaneous coherent fluctuations of the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal at
rest by fMRI is of special interest. Synchronized BOLD fluctuations overlap with brain systems that are involved in functions
such as motor, sensory, language, attention, or default mode
processing (22–28). Evidence for the neuronal nature of socalled resting state networks (RSNs) comes from studies that
employ simultaneous fMRI and electroencephalograms (EEGs)
(29, 30), from the observation of altered connectivity caused by
neurological diseases (5), and from the existence of homologous
RSNs in non-human primates that overlap with neuroanatomically defined systems (31).
Regions including the posterior cingulate, inferior parietal,
and medial prefrontal cortex, constitute a RSN called default
mode network (DMN) (32, 33). The areas of the DMN show
consistently greater BOLD activity during rest than during any
attention-demanding task, a phenomenon called deactivation;
the same regions are prominently involved in episodic memory
processes together with the MTL; their spontaneous fluctuations
at rest are anticorrelated to the spontaneous fluctuations of a
widely distributed neocortical system that largely overlaps with
attention-related RSNs (5, 22, 27, 28, 32, 34–36). In AD, parietal
Author contributions: C.S. and V.R. contributed equally to this work; C.S., A.D., H.F., A.K.,
and A.M.W. designed research; C.S., L.L., H.F., A.K., C.Z., and A.M.W. performed research;
V.D.C. and T.E. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; C.S., V.R., M.M., and A.M.W.
analyzed data; and C.S., V.R., and A.M.W. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
†To

whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: c.sorg@lrz.tum.de.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0708803104/DC1.
© 2007 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA

www.pnas.org#cgi#doi#10.1073#pnas.0708803104

	  
	  

48	  

Parameter
n
Age, years
Sex, male/female
Education, ⬍/⬎12 years
CDR, sum of boxes
MMSE
CERAD (delayed recall)

NC

MCI

16
68.1 ⫾ 3.8
10/6
10/6
0⫾0
29.6 ⫾ 0.5
7.4 ⫾ 1.3

24
69.3 ⫾ 8.1
13/11
14/10
2.2 ⫾ 0.9*
27.7 ⫾ 1.1*
4.3 ⫾ 2.1*

Data are presented as mean ⫾ SD. NC, normal control; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating scale; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Exam; CERAD, Consortium to
Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease. *, P ⬍ 0.05 difference between
groups.

regions of the DMN demonstrate altered functional connectivity
at rest within the DMN itself, to the MTL, and to neocortical
areas that are involved in attention processes (5, 9, 17). Accounting for these findings, the hypothesis suggested above of
altered FC at rest in individuals at high risk for AD can be
specified in terms of RSNs with a focus on FC changes in the
DMN and attention-related RSNs. In general, the finding of
RSNs allows for a broadened perspective on functional brain
disorders in the field of neuroimaging: the brain shows rich
intrinsic dynamics in absence of tasks, with external stimuli more
modulating than determining brain activity (19, 20, 27, 31, 37);
the plurality of RSNs reflects this structured intrinsic activity,
and selective changes of RSNs may characterize traits and states
of functional brain disorders such as AD (18, 19, 21, 26).
Most previous studies investigating RSNs have used regionof-interest (ROI)-based correlation analyses (9, 17, 22–24). The
signal time course of a selected ROI is correlated with remaining
brain areas, resulting in a ROI specific correlation map. More
recently, instead of defining a priori spatial hypotheses, a number
of studies used model-free approaches involving independent
component analysis (ICA) to describe RSNs in rest-fMRI data
(5, 25, 26, 30). ICA allows for the extraction of distinct spatiotemporal patterns by identifying spatially independent and temporally synchronous brain regions (38).
In the present work, we combined ICA and ROI-based
correlation methods to investigate RSNs in patients with aMCI.
We focused on the following questions: (i) Are any RSNs
changed in aMCI compared with healthy elderly? (ii) Are there
any volumetric changes in the patient group pointing at possible
ongoing neurodegeneration? (iii) How are potential functional
and structural changes related with respect to their spatial
extent?
We examined 24 patients and 16 healthy elderly (Table 1).
Participants were instructed to close their eyes and relax during
4 min of fMRI scanning. Rest-fMRI data were analyzed by using
a group ICA approach involving subject-wise concatenation of
the individual fMRI data sets and subsequent back-projection
into subject space (15, 39). Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) of
additional structural MRI data and ROI-based correlation
analyses of the rest-fMRI data were performed to analyze
possible causes of altered functional connectivity.
Results
RSNs in Healthy Elderly and Patients with aMCI. The ICA was

performed employing a group ICA model for fMRI data
(GIFT).§§ After the IC estimation on the subject-wise concatenated data, the toolbox performs the analysis in three stages:
data reduction through principal component analysis (PCA),
§§Correa, N., Adali, T., Li, Y., and Calhoun, V. D. (2005) in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference

on Acoustics, Speech, Signal Processing, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 401– 404.

Sorg et al.

ICA decomposition of aggregate data, and subsequent backreconstruction of individual subject maps and time courses (39,
40). Results of the separate analyses for each study group are
depicted in Fig. 1 [see also supporting information (SI) Table 2].
Each group IC image contains a pair of two spatial IC patterns
that are correlated (red) or anticorrelated (blue) with the time
course of the component (data not shown). In the corresponding
glass brain projection, the result of a one-sample t test for the
back-reconstructed individual subject IC patterns across both
groups is shown [P ⬍ 0.05 false discovery rate (FDR) corrected
for multiple comparisons]. Eight IC patterns represented functionally relevant RSNs as described previously (26). Both IC
patterns of Fig. 1e/E and f/F were pairwise anticorrelated within
one IC. The first two IC patterns of Fig. 1 partly coincide with
the visual cortex: a/A covers inferior parts of the occipital cortex
such as the striate area [Brodmann area (BA) 17/18]; b/B shows
lateral and dorsal parts of the occipital gyrus (BA 19). The
transverse (BA 41) and superior temporal gyrus (BA 22/42) of
the auditory cortex are depicted in Fig. 1c/C. Fig. 1d/D represents a right lateralized frontoparietal network comprising the
supramarginal gyrus (BA 39/40), middle temporal gyrus (BA
21), and middle frontal gyrus (BA 8) on the right side as well as
bilateral frontal areas covering middle and inferior frontal gyrus
(BA 8/9/46). This network is consistent with a ventral/reorienting
attention network (34).
In Fig. 1e/E the upper IC pattern covers medial and lateral
parts of the superior parietal lobe as well as the precuneus (BA
7). This network is constituted by areas well known to be active
during spatial attention (41). The anticorrelated network of Fig.
1e/E (blue) includes a number of areas relevant for sensorimotor
coordination in pre- and postcentral gyri (BA 3/4), the caudal
zone of the cingulate motor cortex (BA 24), and parts of the
superior frontal gyrus (BA 8) (41). The upper IC pattern of Fig.
1f/F includes medial prefrontal areas (BA 9/10/11), anterior (BA
12/32), and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) (BA 23/31), the
inferior temporal gyrus (BA 21), and bilateral supramarginal
gyrus (BA 39) in the parietal lobe. This pattern corresponds to
the DMN (26, 32, 42). Involvement of the hippocampus (HC), as
seen by Greicius et al. (5), was not observed here. The anticorrelated network of Fig. 1f/F covers the superior parietal lobe (BA
7/40), V5/MT, and inferior temporal gyrus (BA 37), as well as
parts of the inferior frontal gyrus mainly on the right side. These
areas comprise a dorsal/executive attention network (34).
Altered RSNs in Patients with aMCI. The second analysis aimed at
between-group differences in corresponding RSNs. We performed a two-sample t test on each of the eight RSNs contrasting
the individual, back-reconstructed IC patterns of both groups.
The only contrasts revealing any group difference concerned
both IC patterns of Fig. 1f/F and are shown in Fig. 2 (P ⬍ 0.05,
FDR corrected). None of the two-sample t tests on the five
remaining components revealed significant group difference at
P ⬍ 0.001, uncorrected for multiple comparisons (cluster extent
threshold, 15 voxels). The following areas of the DMN associated
IC pattern demonstrated reduced component time courserelated activity in the patient group (see also SI Table 3): left
PCC (BA 31), right medial prefrontal cortex (BA 10), and two
small clusters in parietal cortex bilaterally (BA 39). Accordingly,
we found reduced activity in the patient group in bilateral
superior parietal lobes (BA 7, 40) and in the right prefrontal
cortex, namely precentral (BA 4) and inferior frontal gyrus (BA
9) of the anticorrelated IC pattern of Fig. 1f/F.
Patients with aMCI Have Reduced Gray Matter Volume in the Medial
Temporal Lobes. To assess possible causes of reduced functional

connectivity, we analyzed our data for structural differences
between both study groups. Neither the analyses of global
volumes of gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM) nor the
PNAS 兩 November 20, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 47 兩 18761

NEUROSCIENCE

Table 1. Subject demographic information

Fig. 1. RSNs of normal controls (a–f ) and patients with aMCI (A–F). Each group IC image contains a pair of two spatial IC patterns that are correlated (red) or
anticorrelated (blue) with the time course of the component (data not shown). (a/A– d/D) Each pair of IC patterns is shown within one brain image. (e/E and f/F)
Each upper row represents the correlated IC pattern, each lower row the anticorrelated one. IC patterns are superimposed on a single-subject high-resolution
T1 image. The black to yellow/light blue color scale represents z values, ranging from 1.8 to 8.0. Glass brain projections illustrate results of one-sample t tests
on the individual back-reconstructed subject IC patterns across both groups (P ⬍ 0.05, FDR-corrected). (a/A– d/D) One-sample t test on the anticorrelated
individual subject IC patterns provided no significant results. In axial view the right hemisphere is displayed on the right. NC, normal controls.

voxel-wise analysis of WM revealed significant differences.
However, the voxel-wise analysis of GM revealed GM loss
bilaterally in the MTL including the HC, the thalamus, the
insular cortex, as well as in patches within the inferior parietal
lobe (Fig. 3). These findings comply with previous reports on
subtle abnormalities in structural brain images of patients with
aMCI (16, 43). These areas did not overlap with those regions
found to be altered in RSNs of the patient group.
At-Rest Coactivation of HC and PCC Is Absent in Patients with aMCI.

To examine the relation of neocortical disconnectivity and MTL
atrophy we investigated the functional connectivity between the

Fig. 2. Contrasts of RSNs between normal controls and patients with aMCI.
(Left) Maps corresponding to DMNs of Fig. 1f/F, Upper. (Right) Maps corresponding to executive attention networks of Fig. 1f/F, Lower. Color maps
represent significant (P ⬍ 0.05, FDR-corrected) voxels of higher componentrelated activity in controls compared with patients. Corresponding t values are
color-coded with black to yellow (from 0 to 5.0) to light blue (from 0 to 6.2).
Maps are superimposed on a single-subject high-resolution T1 image. The
patient group did not show any significant higher activation for DMN and
executive attention network. For all remaining RSNs of Fig. 1, two-sample t
tests did not reveal any significant difference between the two groups. R, right
hemisphere.
18762 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0708803104

HC and the RSNs with ROI correlation analyses. We hypothesized reduced coactivation of HC and PCC of the DMN in the
patient group. The PCC is the central region of the posterior
DMN that is primarily affected by AD-associated alterations
such as hypometabolism or elevated atrophy rate; impaired
PCC–MTL connectivity is assumed to be the main cause for
prominent metabolic PCC changes in AD (3–7, 17). We computed the pairwise correlations between the time courses from
each HC and the PCC cluster which was identified by ICA. The
average correlation between left/right HC and PCC was z ⫽
0.37/0.30, SE ⫽ 0.08/0.08 in the control group and z ⫽ ⫺0.03/
⫺0.09, SE ⫽ 0.10/0.08 in the patient group. We found significant
group differences for each HC (P ⫽ 0.04/0.02, Bonferroni-

Fig. 3. Color maps showing significant (P ⬍ 0.05, FDR-corrected) voxels of
decreased GM in aMCI compared with controls superimposed on sagittal and
coronal slices transformed in standard MNI space. Corresponding t values are
color-coded with black to yellow (from 0 to 6.3). The distribution of the
complete regional pattern of decreased GM in patients is represented by glass
brain projections.

Sorg et al.

Discussion and Conclusion
In this work we investigated spatiotemporal patterns of hemodynamic activity during relaxed wakefulness and underlying
brain volumes in healthy elderly and patients with amnestic MCI.
By applying ICA, VBM, and ROI-based correlation analyses, we
characterized eight RSNs that were spatially consistent across
subjects and corresponded with functionally relevant patterns.
Areas of the DMN and the executive attention network showed
diminished functional connectivity in patients, whereas the
respective volumes remained unaffected. Atrophy was found for
both MTLs, including HCs in the patient group. Functional
connectivity between both HCs and left PCC of the DMN was
absent in patients. These results suggest that in aMCI a selected
subset of RSNs is affected by altered functional connectivity,
likely representing effects of early neurodegeneration.
Selectively Altered RSNs in Patients with aMCI. Our data suggest that
disconnection phenomena associated with prodromal stages of
AD are specific to a subset of RSNs whereas other networks
remain unaffected. By applying ICA in patients with aMCI, we
found left PCC and right medial prefrontal cortex of the DMN
as well as bilateral superior parietal lobes and bilateral inferior
frontal gyri of the executive attention network to be selectively
affected (Fig. 2). Regions of the affected RSNs did not differ
significantly in volumetric aspects between the two groups,
confirming the functional nature of the observed alterations
(Fig. 3). Our finding concerning the DMN is consistent with
previous results demonstrating altered deactivation in regions of
the DMN in MCI (44). The areas constituting the DMN and the
executive attention network also seem to be involved in early
changes of AD: In patients at risk for AD activity of the PCC or
superior parietal cortex is changed during memory or executive
attention-related tasks, respectively (14, 15). In mild AD, these
regions show changed functional connectivity at rest (5, 9) and
overlap with regional patterns of atrophy, glucose hypometabolism, and hypoperfusion (for overview, see ref. 3). Also, regions
showing early amyloid deposition overlap with posterior parts of
the default mode and executive attention network (2, 3, 45). In
summary, our result of selective changes of RSNs in individuals
at risk for AD corresponds very well with changes that have
previously only been described in AD.
Changes of the MTL are discussed as a possible factor causing
neocortical disconnectivity in AD (2, 4, 5, 7). The HC and
posterior parts of the DMN display coherent spontaneous
activity at rest (36) and constitute an episodic memory network
that is linked to successful recollection (35). Functional connectivity of the HC with neocortical areas, especially with the PCC,
is reduced in AD during rest (17). The VBM analysis (Fig. 3)
demonstrated reduced GM within the MTL in the patient group.
This finding is in line with previous results for aMCI (16, 43) and
points to MTL neurodegeneration (3) as well as impaired
MTL—neocortex connectivity (16). Our ROI correlation analysis revealed that both HCs show significantly reduced functional
connectivity with the left PCC of the DMN in patients compared
with controls. Among all RSNs, the DMN was functionally most
Sorg et al.

strongly related to the HC at rest. This relation was demonstrated by the only significant correlation between left HC and
DMN across all subjects, which is in line with previous results (5,
36). Taken together, the presented results indicate relevant
functional integration of the HC in the DMN at rest as well as
an impaired HC–parietal memory system in aMCI.
We conclude that the selectively changed functional connectivity
of RSNs in individuals at high risk for AD reflects altered connectivity between the MTL and neocortical areas (4, 5, 7, 9, 15, 44).
Apparently, MTL—neocortex disconnectivity is related to neurodegeneration, which is expressed by MTL atrophy (16). In addition
to FC changes in the DMN, our result also points to relevant
functional disconnectivity of the executive attention network, which
is in line with observed attentional deficits in MCI and AD (9, 14,
15). This finding indicates impaired interaction between these two
anticorrelated networks that prominently organize intrinsic brain
activity (9, 22, 28). Finally, our work suggests that rest-fMRI has the
potential for the evaluation of connectivity in patients at risk for AD
for diagnostic purposes; one possible way would be to use ICAderived patterns to define ROIs where FC analysis can classify
patients from controls. We are currently in the process of assessing
symptom progression in our patients in a two-year follow-up
examination where FC analysis might provide a more accurate way
to evaluate the risk of conversion to dementia for individual patients
than neuropsychological testing and structural imaging alone.
RSNs and Functional Brain Disorders. In this work we identified
spatially consistent RSNs across both study groups that match
previous results (22, 24, 26, 46). Damoiseaux et al. (26) evaluated
the spatial consistency of RSNs and found a set of 10 reliably
detectable RSNs across subjects and sessions. Although we changed
many parameters such as ICA model, age, and health condition of
participants, the regional patterns of detected RSNs show large
regional concordance with their findings. Identified RSNs can be
divided into two groups. The spatial patterns of the first group (Fig.
1 a/A, b/B, c/C, and e/E) are associated with sensory or sensorimotor functions, characterized in several previous studies (23, 24,
46, 47). The remaining networks encompass regions involved in
higher cognitive functions (34, 35, 41, 48, 49). The bilateral posterior parietal network of map e/E including precuneus and intraparietal sulcus is known to be associated with spatial attention
processes (41). This network is anticorrelated to the RSN of map
e/E representing regions normally involved in sensorimotor integration; areas of both networks are part of a functional system
participating in goal-directed movement coordination (41). The
spatial pattern of Fig. 1f/F (Upper) covers areas of the DMN; this
network is suggested to support default mode function, such as
maintaining a background level of attention for the detection of
salient events by monitoring internal and external environment
(49). Evidence increases that large parts of the posterior DMN
together with the hippocampal system are associated with autobiographical and prospective memory processing (35, 36, 50). Both the
network of Fig. 1f/F (Lower), involving bilateral superior parietal
cortex, intraparietal sulcus, and inferior frontal gyrus, and the right
lateralized frontoparietal network of Fig. 1d/D overlap with the
regions of the dorsal/executive and ventral/reorienting attention
systems (34). The dorsal attention system is assumed to be involved
in top–down direction of attention, and the ventral system, lateralized to the right, supports reorienting of attention in response to
salient stimuli (27). Rest fluctuations of the two systems, which are
considered member of a group of areas routinely exhibiting taskrelated activation, are anticorrelated to spontaneous BOLD fluctuations of the DMN, demonstrated by ROI-based methods (22,
28). Using ICA, we found the anticorrelated coupling of the DMN
limited to the dorsal attention network. Our result is supported by
the finding that the two attention networks can be distinguished by
their spontaneous rest activity (27); it seems plausible that a system
concerned with attentional shifts in response to salient external
PNAS 兩 November 20, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 47 兩 18763

NEUROSCIENCE

corrected) by applying an analyses of covariance, which included
corresponding HC volume as covariate. The correlation between
left and right HC did not differ significantly between healthy
controls (z ⫽ 0.76, SE ⫽ 0.10) and patients (z ⫽ 0.62, SE ⫽ 0.08)
in a two-sample t test. To evaluate the degree of functional
coactivation of the HCs and any RSN, we separately correlated
the time courses of each HC with the time course of each RSN
across all subjects. The strongest and only significant effect was
found between left HC and the DMN (z ⫽ 0.13, SE ⫽ 0.06, P ⫽
0.003, Bonferroni-corrected, one-sample t test), indicating relevant functional integration of the HC and the DMN during
rest (5).

stimuli is less strongly connected to introspectively oriented default
mode processing during rest than a system involved in goal-directed
orienting of attention.
In summary, we identified eight distinct, partly anticorrelated,
and spatially consistent RSNs in healthy elderly and patients with
aMCI. The division of the rest-related BOLD signal into separate
RSNs presumably reflects the functional organization of brain
activity into stabilized functional–anatomical systems (18, 19, 31).
Regarding the synchronicity of spontaneous BOLD fluctuations
during rest, pathology-induced changes seem to exist also in patients with autism, schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder, or major depression (51–54). Taking into account these
findings and our result of selective changes of RSNs in aMCI, we
suggest that rest-fMRI and especially RSNs constitute very promising tools for the functional characterization of functional brain
disorders, for intergroup comparisons, and possibly with some
potential for assessing functional connectivity on a single-subject
level.
Materials and Methods
Subject data and ICA of rest-fMRI data are described below.
Detailed information regarding ROI-based correlation analyses
of fMRI data and VBM analysis of structural MRI data can be
found in SI Materials and Methods.
Subjects and Task. Sixteen healthy controls (6 female, ages 63–73
years) and 24 patients (11 female, ages 58–80 years) diagnosed with
aMCI participated in the study. All subjects provided informed
consent in accordance with the Human Research Committee
guidelines of the Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität,
München. Patients were recruited from the Memory Clinic of the
Department of Psychiatry, controls by word-of-mouth advertising.
Examination of every subject included medical history, neurological
examination, informant interview (only for patients), neuropsychological assessment [CERAD battery, Consortium to Establish a
Registry for AD (55)], structural MRI, and for patients additional
blood tests. Patients met criteria for aMCI which contain reported
and neuropsychologically assessed memory impairments, largely
intact activities of daily living, and excluded dementia (Table 1)
(11). Exclusion criteria for entry into the study were other neurological, psychiatric, or systemic diseases (e.g., stroke, depression,
alcoholism), or clinically remarkable MRI (e.g., stroke lesions)
which could be related to cognitive impairment. Five controls and
nine patients were treated for hypertension (␤-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and calcium channel blockers),
and six controls and eight patients were treated for hypercholesterolemia (statins). None of the subjects had diabetes mellitus.
None of the subjects or patients received psychotropic medication,
especially cholinesterase inhibitors.
All subjects underwent 4 min of resting-state scan first followed
by an attention and a memory task, which are not discussed here.
For the resting-state scan, subjects were instructed simply to keep
their eyes closed, not to think of anything in particular, and not to
fall asleep.
Imaging Methods. Imaging was performed on a 1.5T Siemens
Symphony system. Functional data were collected by using a
gradient echo EPI sequence (TE ⫽ 50 ms, TR ⫽ 3,000 ms, flip
angle ⫽ 90°, FoV ⫽ 200 mm2, matrix ⫽ 64 ⫻ 64, 33 slices, slice
thickness ⫽ 4 mm, and 0.4-mm interslice gap) (where TE is echo
time, TR is repetition time, FoV is field of view, and T1 is
inversion time) for a 4-min period resulting in a total of 80
volumes. The first three functional scans were discarded before
the subsequent analysis. A T1-weighted anatomical dataset was
obtained from each subject by using a magnetization-prepared
rapid acquisition gradient echo sequence (TE ⫽ 3.93 ms, TR ⫽
1,500 ms, TI ⫽ 760 ms, flip angle ⫽ 5°, FoV ⫽ 256 mm2, matrix ⫽
256 ⫻ 256, 160 slices, voxel size ⫽ 1 ⫻ 1 ⫻1 mm3).
18764 兩 www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0708803104

Preprocessing. Functional MRI data were preprocessed by using the
Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the
Brain Software Library (FMRIB; FSL version 3.2), statistical
parametric mapping (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology; SPM5), and in-house software for Matlab (MathWorks).
In a first step, nonbrain structures were removed from the echo
planar imaging volumes. Next we performed a mean-based intensity normalization of all slices within a volume by the same factor
(56). Data were then motion-corrected, spatially normalized into
the stereotactic space of the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI), and spatially smoothed with an 8 ⫻ 8 ⫻ 8 mm Gaussian
kernel with SPM5. Before they were entered into the ICA, a
voxel-wise transformation was applied on the time course data
yijk(t), ŷijk(t) ⫽ [yijk(t) ⫺ 具yijk典]/␴ijk (for each voxel: t, time; i, j, k, three
directions in space; 具yijk典, mean; ␴ijk standard deviation). This
procedure removed any systematic, between-group differences with
respect to BOLD amplitudes from the four-dimensional data set
ŷijk(t). Sensitivity for variance correlation was thereby rendered
independently of variance magnitude.
ICA. We performed the ICA by using group ICA for fMRI

toolbox (GIFT version 1.3b; icatb.sourceforge.net)§§ established
for the analysis of fMRI data (15, 39, 54). The toolbox supports
a group ICA approach, which first concatenates the individual
data across time, followed by the computation of the subjectspecific components and time courses. For each of the two study
groups the toolbox performed the analysis in three stages: (i)
data reduction, (ii) application of the ICA algorithm, and (iii)
back-reconstruction for each individual subject (39).
In the first step (i), data from each subject were reduced by
using PCA, whereby computational complexity was reduced
and most of the information content of the data was preserved.
After concatenating the resulting volumes, the number of
independent sources was estimated by the GIFT dimensionality estimation tool based on the aggregated data: 28/31 ICs
for the control/patient group (57). The final reduction step
according to the selected number of components was achieved
by PCA again. In the second stage of the analysis (ii) we chose
the Infomax algorithm for running the proper IC analysis and
a GM mask based on all subjects. In the final stage of
back-reconstruction (iii), time courses and spatial maps were
computed for each subject. After back-reconstruction, the
mean spatial maps of each group were transformed to z scores
for display (39). Before any statistics were applied to the
individual subject maps, the initially calculated scaling factor
␴ijk was reintegrated into the data by voxel-wise multiplication.
Each IC contains a pair of two spatial IC patterns that are
correlated or anticorrelated to the time course of the component.
Upon visual inspection, eight IC patterns were located in the cortex
and represented functionally relevant RSNs as described previously
(26, 46). The remaining IC patterns were attributed to two major
forms of artifacts: IC patterns representing tissue border artifacts
near the ventricular system, the skull, and cerebrospinal fluid space
or IC patterns with main activation in midbrain structures below z ⫽
⫺20 (MNI) in axial slices burdened by major vessel artifacts and
lack of reliability in EPI scans. Individual subject IC patterns
representing RSNs were entered into one- and two-sample randomeffects analyses in SPM5. Results were thresholded at P ⬍ 0.05,
FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons. The between-group twosample t tests were masked with a within-group mask thresholded
at P ⬍ 0.05, uncorrected.
We thank two reviewers for constructive suggestions. This work was
supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
Grant 01EV0710 and by Kommision für Klinische Forschung, Klinikum
Rechts der Isar, München Grant 8765160.
Sorg et al.

29. Laufs H, Kleinschmidt A, Beyerle A, Eger E, Salek-Haddadi A, Preibisch C,
Krakow K (2003) NeuroImage 19:1463–1476.
30. Mantini D, Perrucci MG, Del Gratta C, Romani GL, Corbetta M (2007) Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 104:13170–13175.
31. Vincent JL, Patel GH, Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Baker JT, Van Essen DC, Zempel
JM, Snyder LH, Corbetta M, Raichle ME (2007) Nature 447:83–86.
32. Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman
GL (2001) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:676–682.
33. Raichle ME, Snyder AZ (2007) NeuroImage 37:1083–1090.
34. Corbetta M, Shulman GL (2002) Nat Rev Neurosci 3:201–215.
35. Shannon BJ, Buckner RL (2004) J Neurosci 24:10084–10092.
36. Vincent JL, Snyder AZ, Fox MD, Shannon BJ, Andrews JR, Raichle ME,
Buckner RL (2006) J Neurophysiol 96:3517–3531.
37. Buzsaki G, Draguhn A (2004) Science 304:1926–1929.
38. Calhoun VD, Adali T (2006) IEEE Eng Med Biol Mag 25:79–90.
39. Calhoun VD, Adali T, Pearlson GD, Pekar JJ (2001) Hum Brain Mapp
14:140–151.
40. Schmithorst VJ, Holland SK (2004) J Magn Reson Imaging 19:365–368.
41. Grefkes C, Fink GR (2005) J Anat 207:3–17.
42. De Luca M, Beckmann CF, De Stefano N, Matthews PM, Smith SM (2006)
NeuroImage 29:1359–1367.
43. Whitwell JL, Petersen RC, Negash S, Weigand SD, Kantarci K, Ivnik RJ,
Knopman DS, Boeve BF, Smith GE, Jack CR, Jr (2007) Arch Neurol 64:1130–
1138.
44. Rombouts SA, Barkhof F, Goekoop R, Stam CJ, Scheltens P (2005) Hum Brain
Mapp 26:231–239.
45. Klunk WE, Engler H, Nordberg A, Wang Y, Blomqvist G, Holt DP, Bergstrom
M, Savitcheva I, Huang GF, Estrada S, et al. (2004) Ann Neurol 55:306–319.
46. Beckmann CF, Smith SM (2005) NeuroImage 25:294–311.
47. Xiong J, Parsons LM, Gao JH, Fox PT (1999) Hum Brain Mapp 8:151–156.
48. Alescio-Lautier B, Michel BF, Herrera C, Elahmadi A, Chambon C, Touzet C,
Paban V (2007) Neuropsychologia 45:1948–1960.
49. Gusnard DA, Raichle ME, Raichle ME (2001) Nat Rev Neurosci 2:685–694.
50. Addis DR, Wong AT, Schacter DL (2007) Neuropsychologia 45:1363–1377.
51. Cherkassky VL, Kana RK, Keller TA, Just MA (2006) NeuroReport 17:1687–
1690.
52. Greicius MD, Flores BH, Menon V, Glover GH, Solvason HB, Kenna H, Reiss
AL, Schatzberg AF (2007) Biol Psychiatry 62:429–437.
53. Liang M, Zhou Y, Jiang T, Liu Z, Tian L, Liu H, Hao Y (2006) NeuroReport
17:209–213.
54. Garrity AG, Pearlson GD, McKiernan K, Lloyd D, Kiehl KA, Calhoun VD
(2007) Am J Psychiatry 164:450–457.
55. Morris JC, Heyman A, Mohs RC, Hughes JP, van Belle G, Fillenbaum G,
Mellits ED, Clark C (1989) Neurology 39:1159–1165.
56. Manjaly ZM, Marshall JC, Stephan KE, Gurd JM, Zilles K, Fink GR (2003)
NeuroImage 19:674–683.
57. Li YO, Adali T, Calhoun VD (2007) Hum Brain Mapp 28:1251–1266.

NEUROSCIENCE

1. Blennow K, de Leon MJ, Zetterberg H (2006) Lancet 368:387–403.
2. Braak H, Braak E (1991) Acta Neuropathol 82:239–259.
3. Buckner RL, Snyder AZ, Shannon BJ, LaRossa G, Sachs R, Fotenos AF,
Sheline YI, Klunk WE, Mathis CA, Morris JC, et al. (2005) J Neurosci
25:7709–7717.
4. Meguro K, LeMestric C, Landeau B, Desgranges B, Eustache F, Baron JC
(2001) J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 71:315–321.
5. Greicius MD, Srivastava G, Reiss AL, Menon V (2004) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
101:4637–4642.
6. Lavenex P, Suzuki WA, Amaral DG (2002) J Comp Neurol 447:394–420.
7. Blaizot X, Meguro K, Millien I, Baron JC, Chavoix C (2002) J Neurosci
22:9166–9170.
8. Van Hoesen GW (1997) J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 9:331–341.
9. Wang K, Liang M, Wang L, Tian L, Zhang X, Li K, Jiang T (2007) Hum Brain
Mapp 28:967–978.
10. Delbeuck X, Van der Linden M, Collette F (2003) Neuropsychol Rev 13:79–92.
11. Gauthier S, Reisberg B, Zaudig M, Petersen RC, Ritchie K, Broich K, Belleville
S, Brodaty H, Bennett D, Chertkow H, et al. (2006) Lancet 367:1262–1270.
12. Petersen RC, Smith GE, Waring SC, Ivnik RJ, Tangalos EG, Kokmen E (1999)
Arch Neurol 56:303–308.
13. Dickerson BC, Salat DH, Greve DN, Chua EF, Rand-Giovannetti E, Rentz
DM, Bertram L, Mullin K, Tanzi RE, Blacker D, et al. (2005) Neurology
65:404–411.
14. Dannhauser TM, Walker Z, Stevens T, Lee L, Seal M, Shergill SS (2005) Brain
128:1418–1427.
15. Celone KA, Calhoun VD, Dickerson BC, Atri A, Chua EF, Miller SL, DePeau
K, Rentz DM, Selkoe DJ, Blacker D, et al. (2006) J Neurosci 26:10222–10231.
16. Stoub TR, DeToledo-Morrell L, Stebbins GT, Leurgans S, Bennett DA, Shah
RC (2006) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:10041–10045.
17. Wang L, Zang Y, He Y, Liang M, Zhang X, Tian L, Wu T, Jiang T, Li K (2006)
NeuroImage 31:496–504.
18. Buckner RL, Vincent JL (2007) NeuroImage 37:1091–1096.
19. Fox MD, Raichle ME (2007) Nat Rev Neurosci 8:700–711.
20. Raichle ME, Mintun MA (2006) Annu Rev Neurosci 29:449–476.
21. Matthews PM, Honey GD, Bullmore ET (2006) Nat Rev Neurosci 7:732–744.
22. Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Corbetta M, Van Essen DC, Raichle ME
(2005) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9673–9678.
23. Hampson M, Peterson BS, Skudlarski P, Gatenby JC, Gore JC (2002) Hum
Brain Mapp 15:247–262.
24. Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS (1995) Magn Reson Med
34:537–541.
25. Beckmann CF, Smith SM (2004) IEEE Trans Med Imaging 23:137–152.
26. Damoiseaux JS, Rombouts SA, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, Stam CJ, Smith SM,
Beckmann CF (2006) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:13848–13853.
27. Fox MD, Corbetta M, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Raichle ME (2006) Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 103:10046–10051.
28. Fransson P (2005) Hum Brain Mapp 26:15–29.

Sorg et al.

PNAS 兩 November 20, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 47 兩 18765

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Supporting	  Information	  
	  
Materials	  and	  Methods	  
Data	  analysis:	  VBM	  
For statistical comparison of the anatomical T1-weighted images VBM2 software (http://dbm.neuro.unijena.de/vbm), an extension of SPM2 software (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm), was used. VBM2 applies the
“optimized” protocol (1, 2) and, additionally, a hidden Markov random field model (3). We used study-specific
prior probability maps and a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm for smoothing. Global volumes of gray matter (GM),
white matter (WM), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were derived from the non-normalized segmented images as
provided by SPM2 after the first segmentation process. Total intracranial volume (TIV) was approximated by the
sum of the global volumes of GM, WM, and CSF. To correct for head size, brain tissue fractions of FGM, FWM,
and FCSF were calculated by dividing the respective volumes by the TIV. For group comparisons of global
values, 2-sided independent t-tests were performed. Differences between groups at a level of p < 0.05 were
regarded as significant. For the voxel-wise analysis of GM, we applied an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
and included gender, age, and the global GM volume as nuisance variables. White matter reportedly is not
dependent on these covariates therefore analysis was performed as Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) (1, 2) with p
< 0.05. We included only voxels with a GM value greater than 0.1 (maximum value: 1) to avoid possible edge
effects around the border between GM, WM, and CSF. We applied a height threshold of p<0.05, FDR corrected,
corresponding to a voxel level of p<0.001 uncorrected and an extent threshold of p<0.05 family wise error
(FWE) corrected corresponding to a cluster extent of 542 contiguous voxels.
	  
Data	  analysis:	  ROI-­‐based	  correlation	  analysis	  	  	  	  	  
Data	  were	  preprocessed	  as	  described	  in	  Methods	  with	  two	  additional	  steps:	  After	  smoothing	  and	  before	  
variance	  normalising	  data	  were	  low-­‐pass	  filtered	  (f<0.1	  Hz)	  and	  mean	  signal	  values	  which	  were	  calculated	  
by	  averaging	  over	  the	  gray	  matter	  mask	  were	  removed	  for	  each	  group.	  These	  procedures	  eliminate	  any	  
systematic	  fluctuations	  not	  involved	  in	  specific	  regional	  correlations.	  Three	  ROIs	  were	  created:	  The	  ROIs	  
for	  the	  left	  and	  right	  HC	  were	  derived	  from	  the	  automated	  anatomical	  labeling	  ROI	  library	  (4);	  the	  most	  
significant	  cluster	  from	  the	  between-­‐group	  two-­‐sample	  t-­‐test	  of	  the	  DMN	  of	  our	  ICA	  approach	  which	  was	  
centred	  in	  the	  left	  posterior	  cingulate	  provided	  the	  third	  ROI	  (see	  Results).	  For	  the	  correlation	  analysis	  
between	  left/right	  HC	  and	  left	  posterior	  cingulate	  voxelwise	  BOLD	  time	  courses	  for	  each	  ROI	  were	  
extracted	  and	  first	  eigenvectors	  of	  each	  ROI	  were	  computed.	  Then	  correlation	  coefficients	  for	  each	  pair	  of	  
ROIs	  were	  calculated.	  Temporal	  correlation	  coefficients	  were	  converted	  to	  z	  values	  by	  using	  Fischer’s	  r-­‐to-­‐
z	  transformation.	  This	  transformation	  generates	  values	  that	  are	  approximately	  normally	  distributed.	  
Afterwards	  data	  from	  patients	  and	  healthy	  controls	  concering	  the	  HC-­‐PCC	  correlation	  were	  entered	  into	  
corresponding	  ANCOVAs	  with	  HC	  volumes	  as	  covariates	  and	  results	  were	  Bonferroni	  corrected.	  HC	  
volumes	  were	  derived	  from	  the	  VBM	  analysis.	  The	  significance	  for	  the	  correlation	  between	  both	  HCs	  was	  
tested	  in	  a	  two-­‐sample	  t-­‐test.	  For	  the	  analysis	  of	  the	  functional	  integration	  of	  the	  HC	  into	  any	  RSN	  the	  time	  
courses	  of	  each	  IC	  representing	  a	  RSN	  were	  extracted	  using	  the	  group	  ICA	  for	  fMRI	  toolbox	  (GIFT,	  see	  
Results).	  Correlation	  analyses	  for	  both	  HC	  and	  each	  RSN	  were	  performed	  separately	  as	  described	  above	  
for	  pairwise	  ROI	  correlation	  analysis.	  After	  using	  Fischer’s	  r-­‐to-­‐z	  transformation	  data	  of	  all	  subjects	  were	  
entered	  into	  a	  one-­‐sample	  random-­‐effects	  analysis	  and	  results	  were	  Bonferroni	  corrected.	  

	  

54	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

	  
References	  
1.	  

Ashburner,	  J.	  &	  Friston,	  K.	  J.	  (2000)	  Neuroimage	  11,	  805-­‐821.	  

2.	  

Good,	  C.	  D.,	  Johnsrude,	  I.	  S.,	  Ashburner,	  J.,	  Henson,	  R.	  N.,	  Friston,	  K.	  J.,	  &	  Frackowiak,	  R.	  S.	  (2001)	  
Neuroimage	  14,	  21-­‐36.	  

3.	  

Cuadra,	  M.	  B.,	  Cammoun,	  L.,	  Butz,	  T.,	  Cuisenaire,	  O.,	  &	  Thiran,	  J.	  P.	  (2005)	  IEEE	  Trans	  Med	  Imaging	  
24,	  1548-­‐1565.	  

4.	  

Tzourio-­‐Mazoyer,	  N.,	  Landeau,	  B.,	  Papathanassiou,	  D.,	  Crivello,	  F.,	  Etard,	  O.,	  Delcroix,	  N.,	  Mazoyer,	  
B.,	  &	  Joliot,	  M.	  (2002)	  Neuroimage	  15,	  273-­‐289.	  

	  

	  
Table	  2.	  Peak	  foci	  for	  ICs	  d/D	  to	  f/F	  corresponding	  to	  Figure	  1	  
lobe

voxels anatomy

BA

L/R z-­‐score peak	  x;y;z

IC	  d/D
frontal

1524 middle	  frontal	  gyrus

8,	  9,	  46 R

5.85 [42;42;24]

R

5.61 [42;12;30]

R

5.20 [45;48;-­‐6]

8

R

4.87 [3;30;42]

9,	  46

L

6.09 [-­‐48;27;24]

inferior	  frontal	  gyrus
73 medial	  frontal	  gyrus
655 middle	  frontal	  gyrus

4.69 [-­‐42;45;15]
4.65 [-­‐45;18;39]
temporal

126 middle	  temporal	  gyrus

21

R

4.67 [63;-­‐54;-­‐3]
4.18 [66;-­‐30;-­‐15]

parietal

522 supramarginal	  gyrus

39,	  40

R

5.60 [39;-­‐69;39]
4.28 [54;-­‐57;27]
3.96 [48;-­‐48;54]

30 supramarginal	  gyrus

39

L

3.93 [-­‐36;-­‐78;45]
3.62 [-­‐39;-­‐69;39]

IC	  e/E	  
time-­‐course	  correlated	  IC-­‐pattern	  (red)
parietal

3454 superior	  parietal	  lobe,	  precuneus

7

L/R

6.10 [39;-­‐72;42]
5.73 [6;-­‐75;48]
5.54 [-­‐12;-­‐81;51]

78 MT	  +

19

L

4.12 [-­‐48;-­‐60;-­‐15]

59

19

R

3.29 [54;-­‐54;-­‐18]

R

4.01 [6;-­‐54;-­‐51]

22 cerebellum

	  

55	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

time-­‐course	  anti-­‐correlated	  IC-­‐pattern	  (blue)
frontal

375 cingular	  motor	  cortex,	  caudal	  zone
superior	  frontal	  gyrus

24

L/R

5.39 [12;-­‐15;42]

8

L

4.87 [-­‐15;15;51]
4.67 [-­‐12;-­‐18;21]

239 post-­‐	  /precentral	  gyrus	  

3/4	  

L

4.67 [-­‐33;-­‐27;45]
4.43 [-­‐51;-­‐9;39]

51 post-­‐	  /precentral	  gyrus	  

3/4	  

R

4.22 [57;-­‐15;39]
3.79 [63;-­‐6;36]

22 anterior	  cingulate	  cortex,	  caudal	  zone 24

R

4.13 [6;18;33]

50 inferior	  frontal	  gyrus

47

L

4.67 [-­‐51;33;0]

11

L/R

6.53 [-­‐3;51;-­‐9]

IC	  f/F
time-­‐course	  correlated	  IC-­‐pattern	  (red)
frontal

temporal

2510 orbital	  gyrus,	  superior	  frontal	  gyrus
anterior	  cingulate

12

superior	  frontal	  gyrus

10

anterior	  cingulate

32

superior	  frontal	  gyrus

9

125 middle	  temporal	  gyrus

21

6.32 [6;51;12]

5.96 [-­‐18;27;48]
L

5.58 [-­‐60;-­‐15;-­‐21]
5.35 [-­‐60;-­‐24;-­‐21]

97

R

4.44 [57;-­‐3;-­‐30]
4.10 [63;-­‐6;-­‐21]

parietal

805 posterior	  cingulate

31

posterior	  cingulate

30

253 supramarginal	  gyrus

39

L/R

6.09 [-­‐6;-­‐51;24]
5.10 [-­‐6;-­‐57;6]

L

4.71 [-­‐45;-­‐66;33]
4.70 [-­‐51;-­‐66;24]

137

R

4.33 [51;-­‐69;30]
4.19 [57;-­‐60;21]

time-­‐course	  anti-­‐correlated	  IC-­‐pattern	  (blue)
frontal

173 inferior	  frontal	  gyrus,	  opercular	  part

44

R

5.18 [54;9;-­‐3]

178 inferior	  frontal	  gyrus,	  triangular	  part

9

R

5.00 [36;30;-­‐3]
4.57 [42;39;21]
4.49 [45;45;0]

130 inferior	  frontal	  gyrus

L

4.72 [-­‐45;42;30]
4.29 [-­‐45;42;15]

	  

56	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

21 precentral	  gyrus

4

Valentin Riedl, 2012

R

3.96 [54;9;45]
3.60 [51;0;54]

temporal

47 inferior	  temporal	  gyrus

37

21 insula
40 inferior	  temporal	  gyrus

37

L

4.63 [-­‐48;-­‐48;-­‐15]

R

4.22 [39;-­‐9;-­‐9]

R

3.91 [54;-­‐51;-­‐12]
3.84 [42;-­‐51;-­‐15]

28 V5/MT
parietal

1164 superior	  parietal	  lobe

7,	  40

L

4.26 [-­‐54;-­‐63;0]

R

5.69 [18;-­‐66;54]

intraparietal	  sulcus

5.67 [57;-­‐36;33]
5.09 [42;-­‐45;36]

945 superior	  parietal	  lobe

7,	  40

L

6.16 [-­‐60;-­‐33;33]
5.42 [-­‐54;-­‐42;39]
4.89 [-­‐60;-­‐45;30]

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

57	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Table	  3.	  Peak	  foci	  of	  brain	  regions	  showing	  higher	  activation	  in	  the	  control	  group	  
in	  the	  default	  mode	  and	  executive	  attention	  network	  (IC	  f/F	  in	  Fig.1)	  
corresponding	  to	  Fig.	  2	  	  
	  
lobe

voxels anatomy

BA

L/R z-­‐score peak	  x;y;z

10

R

4.33 [6;63;27]

31

L

4.47 [-­‐6;-­‐54;24]

Default	  mode	  network
frontal

48 superior	  frontal	  gyrus

parietal

126 posterior	  cingulate

3.92 [0;-­‐54;15]
45 supramarginal	  gyrus

39

L

3.76 [-­‐45;-­‐69;36]

R

3.26 [51;-­‐66;33]

4	  

R	  

4.11	   [45;3;57]	  

20 supramarginal	  gyrus

Executive	  attention	  network
frontal

59	   precentral	  gyrus	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

4.07	   [54;9;45]	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3.22	   [54;-­‐3;48]	  

R	  

3.81	   [36;45;33]	  

	  

34	   inferior	  frontal	  gyrus	  (triangular	  part)	   9	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3.52	   [33;51;27]	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

2.95	   [33;42;24]	  

R	  

3.20	   [57;12;-­‐6]	  

	  

10	   inferior	  frontal	  gyrus	  (opercular	  part)	   	  

parietal	  

245	   superior	  parietal	  lobe	  

7,	  40	   R	  

5.31	   [63;-­‐30;30]	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3.67	   [57;-­‐21;51]	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3.41	   [66;-­‐24;18]	  

	  

L	  

4.87	   [-­‐63;-­‐30;24]	  

	  

237	   superior	  parietal	  lobe	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

4.12	   [-­‐54;-­‐30;48]	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3.68	   [-­‐60;-­‐18;42]	  

24	  

R	  

4.17	   [3;12;48]	  

	  

63	   anterior	  cingulate	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3.72	   [6;6;36]	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3.67	   [9;0;48]	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

58	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

11 Paper	  5:	  Increased	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  the	  striatum	  reflects	  symptom	  dimensions	  in	  
schizophrenia	  
(Schizophr	  Bull	  Bulletin
2012)	   Advance Access published January 12, 2012
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia Bulletin
doi:10.1093/schbul/sbr184

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

Increased Intrinsic Brain Activity in the Striatum Reflects Symptom Dimensions in
Schizophrenia

Christian Sorg1–3,!, Andrei Manoliu1,2,!, Susanne Neufang2, Nicholas Myers2,4, Henning Peters2, Dirk Schwerthöffer1,
Martin Scherr1, Mark Mühlau5, Claus Zimmer2, Alexander Drzezga3, Hans Förstl1, Josef Bäuml1, Tom Eichele6,7,
Afra M. Wohlschläger2,5, and Valentin Riedl2–5,*
1
Department of Psychiatry, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany; 2Department of Neuroradiology,
Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Ismaninger strasse 22, 81675 Munich, Germany; 3Department of Nuclear
Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany; 4Munich Center for Neurosciences Brain and
Mind, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany; 5Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische
Universität München, Munich, Germany; 6Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway;
7
The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM

!Both the authors equally contributed to the study.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed; tel: 49-89-4140-7631, fax: 49-89-4140-7665, e-mail: valentin.riedl@mytum.de

Introduction

Striatal dysfunction is thought to be a fundamental element
in schizophrenia. Striatal dopamine dysfunction impacts on
reward processing and learning and is present even at rest.
Here, we addressed the question whether and how spontaneous
neuronal activity in the striatum is altered in schizophrenia.
We therefore assessed intrinsic striatal activity and its relation with disorder states and symptom dimensions in
patients with schizophrenia. We performed resting-state
functional (rs-fMRI) and structural magnetic resonance
imaging as well as psychometric assessment in 21 schizophrenic patients during psychosis. On average 9 months
later, we acquired follow-up data during psychotic remission and with comparable levels of antipsychotic medication. Twenty-one age- and sex-matched healthy controls
were included in the study. Independent component analysis
of fMRI data yielded spatial maps and time-courses of
coherent ongoing blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal fluctuations, which were used for group comparisons and correlation analyses with scores of the positive and negative
syndrome scale. During psychosis, coherent intrinsic activity
of the striatum was increased in the dorsal part andcorrelated
with positive symptoms such as delusion and hallucination.
In psychotic remission of the same patients, activity of the
ventral striatum was increased and correlated with negative
symptoms such as emotional withdrawal and blunted affect.
Results were controlled for volumetric and medication
effects. These data provide first evidence that in schizophrenia intrinsic activity is changed in the striatum and corresponds to disorder states and symptom dimensions.

Striatal dysfunction is thought to be a fundamental element in schizophrenia.1 Especially, dopamine transmission in the striatum is increased during prodromal and
psychotic states.2,3 Such elevated dopamine levels correlate
with positive disease symptoms and antidopaminergic
drugs reduce these symptoms in most patients.4
It is still unclear, how striatal dopamine relates to brain
activity in humans, but animal experiments revealed that
increased dopamine modulates spontaneous activity in the
striatum.5,6 Furthermore, theoretical accounts suggest
that changed spontaneous brain activity contributes to
psychotic symptoms by worsening the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) of evoked and intrinsic activity.7,8 In particular,
noisy striatal signals are assumed to contribute to aberrant
salience processing and disrupted reinforcement learning
that both underlie positive symptoms in schizophrenia
such as delusions.9–11
These data suggest that an investigation of intrinsic brain
activity in humans might help to better understand the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Few studies reported
on global connectivity changes in the intrinsic functional
architecture of schizophrenic patients.12 Others have concentrated on cortical networks of intrinsic activity and
found distributed changes in frontal, temporal, and parietal
cortices.13–16 However, in vivo evidence for specifically
altered intrinsic activity in the resting-state signal of the
striatum is missing.
In order to test for aberrant intrinsic striatal activity,
we measured ongoing hemodynamic signal fluctuations
with fMRI during a 10-minutes rest period (rs-fMRI) in

Key words: schizophrenia/psychosis/intrinsic brain
activity/resting-state fMRI/striatum

! The Authors 2012. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

	  
	  

	  

1

59	  

	  

C. Sorg et al.

Table 1. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics

Age

33.57 (13.6)

34.05 (12.27)

33.69 (10.53)

Sex
(male/female)

10/11

10/11

9/4

PANSS
Total
Positive
Negative
General
GAF
CPZ

30.14
7.05
7 10
16.05
99.76

(0.65)
(0.22)
(0.44)
(0.22)
(1.09)

SP
(n = 21)
Mean
(SD)

80.76
19.4
21.14
39.81
39.62
388.61

(20.77)
(6.09)
(8.20)
(11.06)
(11.68)
(384.67)

SPR
(n = 13)
Mean
(SD)

52.75
11.92
13.58
27.25
59.25
206.95

(13.93)
(3.63)
(5.63)
(8.30)
(14.44)
(189.67)

SP (n = 21) vs
HC (n = 21)a

SPR (n = 13) vs
HC (n = 13)a

SP (n = 13) vs
SPR (n = 13)b

T Score

T Score

T Score

P Value

6.466
3.212
3.345
4.473
3.627
1.281

.000*
.008*
.007*
.001*
.004*
.227

0.121

8.96
9.091
7.84
9.846
23.492

P Value
0.904

.000*
.000*
.000*
.000*
.000*

0.330

3.240
4.801
4.102
4.858
10.046

P Value
0.745

.004*
.000*
.000*
.000*
.000*

Note: HC, healthy control group; SP, group of patients with schizophrenia during psychosis; SPR, group of patients with schizophrenia
during psychotic remission; PANSS, Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale; GAF, Global Assessment of Functioning Scale; CPZ,
chlorpromazine equivalent dose.
a
Two-sample t test.
b
Paired t test.
*Significant for P < .05 corrected for multiple comparisons.

patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls (HCs).
Patients were assessed during psychosis and during psychotic remission. We decomposed the rs-fMRI data with
independent component analysis (ICA) into spatially independent maps of intrinsically coupled brain regions with associated blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal
fluctuations.17 From these spatial maps, we selected a previously described basal ganglia resting-state network
(BGN) including the striatum.18 Additionally, we selected
any further intrinsic cortical network with striatal contributions. The ICA approach allows the simultaneous exploration of intrinsic connectivity changes of the striatum within
several networks.19 We controlled our analyses of intrinsic
functional connectivity for medication effects and structural changes.
We addressed the following questions: (1) is intrinsic
striatal activity changed in schizophrenia; (2) are potential changes modulated by psychosis, which is characterized by hyperdopaminergia1; and (3) are changes related
to symptom dimensions of schizophrenia.
Methods
Participants and Task
Twenty-one patients and 21 HCs participated in the study
(table 1). All participants provided informed consent in accordance with the Human Research Committee guidelines
of the Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München. Patients were recruited from the Department
of Psychiatry, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, TU München,
controls by word of mouth advertising. Participants’ examination included medical history, psychiatric interview,
2

psychometric assessment, and blood tests for patients
(all performed by D.S. and M.S.). Psychiatric diagnoses
were based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV).20 The Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-I German version)
was used to assess the presence of psychiatric diagnoses.
The severity of clinical symptoms was measured with
the positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS)21 on
the day of scanning. D.S. and M.S. have been professionally trained for SCID and PANSS-based interviews with
interrater reliability for diagnoses and scores of more
than 95%. The global level of social, occupational, and
psychological functioning was measured with the Global
Assessment of Functioning Scale.22
All patients were diagnosed with schizophrenia. Further inclusion criteria were an age between 18 and
60 years, current psychotic symptoms for the fMRI-session
during psychosis (SP) and remission of psychotic symptoms
(indicated by significantly decreased PANSS scores) for the
fMRI-session during psychotic remission (SPR). Patients
were inpatient during SP and ambulatory during SPR. On average about 9 months after psychosis (tmean = 285.84 days, SD
= 167.66), 13 of 21 patients approved a second investigation
during remission. The 8 remaining patients that also were diagnosed as remitted from psychosis by external psychiatrists
could not be convinced of an additional reexamination and
rescanning. Importantly, the subsample of patients that
was reexamined did not differ from the initial patient group
with respect to demographical or medication parameters
(table 1) but had significantly reduced PANSS scores.
Patients were free of any current or past neurological
or internal systemic disorder, current depressive or manic

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

Measure

HC
(n = 21)
Mean
(SD)

Intrinsic Striatal Activity Predicts Symptom Dimensions

FMRI Data Acquisition and Analysis
MRI was performed on a 3 T whole-body MR scanner
(Achieva; Philips, Netherland) using an 8-channel
phased-array head coil. For coregistration and volumetric analysis, T1-weighted anatomical data were obtained
from each subject by using a magnetization-prepared
rapid acquisition gradient echo sequence (echo time
[TE] = 4 ms, time of repetition [TR] = 9 ms, inversion
time [TI] = 100 ms, flip angle = 5, field of view
[FoV] = 240 3 240 mm2, matrix = 240 3 240, 170 slices,
voxel size = 1 3 1 3 1 mm3). FMRI data were collected using
a gradient echo planar imaging sequence (TE = 35 ms, TR =
2000 ms, flip angle = 82, FoV = 220 3 220 mm2, matrix = 80
3 80, 32 slices, slice thickness = 4 mm, and 0 mm interslice
gap; 10 minutes of scanning result in 300 volumes).
For each participant, the first 3 functional scans of each
fMRI-session were discarded due to magnetization effects.
Statistical parametric mapping 8 (SPM8) (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London) was used for
motion correction, spatial normalization into the stereotactic space of the Montreal Neurological Institute and
spatial smoothing with an 8 3 8 3 8 mm Gaussian kernel.
None of the participants had to be excluded due to excessive head motion (linear shift <3 mm across run and on
a frame-to-frame basis, rotation <1.5). We also verified
nonsignificant differences in the SNR ratio of the fMRI

data between healthy subjects (mean: 47.27, SD: 10.79)
and patient group (mean: 46.21, SD: 11.6) with P = .76.
Preprocessed data were decomposed into 40 spatial independent components within a group ICA framework,17
which is based on the infomax algorithm and implemented
in the GIFT-software (http://icatb.sourceforge.net).
Dimensionality estimation was performed by using the
minimum description length criteria and resulted in
40 components representing the mean of all individual
estimates. Before volumes were entered into ICA analysis,
voxel-wise z-transformation on time course data yijk(t) was
applied by subtracting
the mean

 Æyijk æ and dividing by the
SD rijk ( ijk ðtÞ= yijk ðtÞ  Æ yijk æ =rijk , t time, i,j,k directions
in space). The sensitivity of the multivariate ICA algorithm for correlation of variance between voxels, ie, functional connectivity, was thereby rendered independent of
the original BOLD signal magnitude across subjects. Data
were concatenated and reduced by 2-step principal component analysis, followed by independent component estimation with the infomax algorithm. We subsequently ran
40 ICA (ICASSO) to ensure stability of the estimated components. This results in a set of average group components,
which are then back reconstructed into single-subject space.
We then applied a multiple spatial regression with a mask
containing caudate nucleus and putamen to the 40 independent components to automatically select those including the
striatum (figure 1, supplementary figure S1 and tables S2
and S3). The mask was generated with the WFU-Pickatlas
(http://www.fmri.wfubmc.edu/). Before we entered the individual’s spatial maps into second-level statistics, we reintegrated the initially calculated scaling factor rijk into the
data by voxel-wise multiplication in order to preserve
each individual’s profile of variance magnitude while leaving the normalized time course component unchanged.26
To statistically evaluate spatial maps of selected independent components (ICs), we calculated voxel-wise onesample t tests on participants’ reconstructed spatial maps
for each group and session, using SPM8 (P < .05, false
discovery rate [FDR], figure 1). To analyze group effects,
participants’ spatial maps were entered into two-sample
t tests with striatal volumes as covariate of no interest
when comparing patients with HC (P < .05 FDR-corrected,
figure 2, supplementary table S4). To evaluate the temporal
aspect of selected ICs, we investigated the frequency distribution of each IC’s time course. The power spectral density
of each participant’s time course for each session was calculated and then averaged across frequencies ranging from
0.01 to 0.1 Hz. Differences across groups were assessed by
using two-sample t tests (supplementary figure S2).
The relation between striatal activity and symptom
dimensions was studied within a region of interest
(ROI)–based approach. ROI-restricted z scores (derived
from subjects’ BGN-ICs) were partially correlated with
PANSS scores in patients with striatal volume and antipsychotic medication CPZ as regressors of no interest
3

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

episode, substance abuse (except nicotine), and cerebral
pathology in MRI. Three of 21 patients during psychosis
and 4 of 13 patients during psychotic remission were free
of antipsychotic medication. All other patients received
mono- or dual therapy with atypical antipsychotic medication, including Amilsupride (2 cases during SP/1
case during SPR), Olanzapine (11/1), Clozapine (4/3),
Quetiapine (2/3), Ziprasidone (1/0), Risperidone (5/2),
Aripiprazole (2/1), and Paliperidone (3/1) (see online
supplementary table S1 for individual medication protocols and dosage; see also table 1 for mean chlorpromazine
(CPZ) equivalent dose23). Importantly, CPZ did not differ significantly between SP and SPR. All controls were
free of any current or past psychiatric, neurological or
systemic disorder, or psychotropic medication.
All participants underwent 10 minutes of rs-fMRI with
the instruction to keep their eyes closed and not to fall
asleep. We verified that subjects stayed awake by interrogating via intercom immediately after the rs-fMRI
scan. Before and after scanning, a medical examination
of patients validated their stable condition and investigated whether they had feelings of odd situations during
the scanning. No patient dropped out during the first
scanning session. HCs were scanned only once to define
the range of normal BGN coherence; thus, it was not possible to directly test for schizophrenia-specific changes
between first and second scan. However, several independent rs-fMRI studies in HCs confirmed the consistency of
rs-fMRI networks across days and months.24,25

C. Sorg et al.

(partial correlation, P < .05; figure 3, table 1). Striatal
ROIs were created by using the MARSBAR-toolbox
(Release 0.42, http://marsbar.sourceforge.net/). Centers
of spheric ROIs with 6 mm radius were derived from
the study of Martinez and colleagues,27 including left
and right associative striatum (624, 12, 0) and left and
right limbic striatum (612, 9, 9). For patients’ BGNIC of each session, z scores were extracted for each
ROI and averaged across each bilateral ROI-pair.
Voxel-Based Morphometry Analysis
In order to control any functional connectivity results
for potentially structural alterations, we calculated an averaged volumetric score for the striatum and included
that as a covariate of no interest. For data preprocessing
and analysis, the voxel-based morphometry 8 (VBM8)
toolbox (http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm.html) was
used. Images were corrected for bias-field inhomogeneity,
registered using linear (12-parameter affine) and nonlinear
transformations, and tissue classified into gray matter
4

(GM), white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid within the
same generative model.28 The resulting GM images were
modulated to account for volume changes resulting from
the normalization process. Here, we only considered nonlinear volume changes so that further analyses did not have
to account for differences in head size. Finally, images were
smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm (FWHM). We
then calculated an averaged score for bilateral ventral and
dorsal striatum and tested that for group differences.
Additionally, we included this averaged VBM score as
covariate of no interest in the above-described functional
analysis of group differences across spatial IC maps.
Results
The Basal Ganglia Network Includes the Ventral and
Dorsal Striatum
For each subject, ICA of fMRI data resulted in spatial
maps, displayed in z scores, and associated time course
values. Together, these measures represent the relative

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

Fig. 1. Spatial maps of coherent intrinsic activity within the basal ganglia network (BGN). After independent component analysis of resting-state
fMRI data, spatial maps of single-subject ICs representing the BGN were entered into voxel-wise one-sample t tests across individuals of each
group and thresholded at P < .05, corrected for false discovery rate. Statistical parametric maps representing brain areas with significantly
covarying activity were superimposed on a single-subject high-resolution T1 image (color scale representing z values from 0 to 16). The BGN
includes the striatum, pallidum, and thalamus. (a) Patients during psychosis, (b) patients during psychotic remission, and (c) healthy controls.

Intrinsic Striatal Activity Predicts Symptom Dimensions

degree to which the component contributes to the overall
BOLD signal at a given time point. Automated component
selection by spatially regressing a striatum mask with all
spatial maps revealed a subcortical basal ganglia network
(BGN) in each individual (supplementary table S2). This
BGN was spatially consistent across groups and sessions,
matched previous results,18 and included the striatum
(nucleus caudatus, putamen), globus pallidus, and thalamus
(figure 1, one-sample t test, P < .05, correction for false discovery rate). Additionally, 3 further ICs with cortical centers of mass had minor striatal contribution (supplementary
figure S1 and tables S2 and S3).
Spatial Maps of Coherent Intrinsic Brain Activity Reflect
Psychosis and Psychotic Remission in Distinct Parts of the
Striatum
Compared with controls, psychotic patients showed
increased activity in the associative and sensorimotor

striatum of the BGN (figure 2 and supplementary table
S4, two-sample t test, P < .05 FDR, corrected for striatal
volume). During psychotic remission, the same patients
showed stronger activity in bilateral limbic striatum
(figure 2 and supplementary table S4, two-sample t test, P
< .05 FDR, corrected for striatal volume) when compared
with HC. The 3 cortical ICs with striatal involvement did
not differ across groups and sessions (P < .001 uncorrected).
Spectral Power of Time Courses of Synchronous Activity
Was Changed During Psychotic Remission
As a complementary measure to the spatial information
provided by component maps, we estimated the spectral
power of BGN-time courses, averaged for frequencies
from 0.01 to 0.1 Hz, and compared them across groups
and sessions (supplementary figure S2; two-sample t tests
for comparisons with controls, paired t test for comparisons across sessions). Patients in psychotic remission
5

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

Fig. 2. Increasingly synchronized intrinsic activity in distinct locations of the striatum depends on disorder state. Statistical parametric maps
(SPMs) of brain areas with significantly increased covarying activity in patients. (a) Two-sample t test between patients during psychosis and
healthy controls (HCs), Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI)-coordinates [x,y,z] of the SPM: [27,12,4]; (b) Two-sample t test between
patients during psychotic remission and HCs, MNI-coordinates: [17,5,8]; (c) Overlay of (a) and (b) reveals spatially distinct subregions
within the striatum, MNI-planes (y,z): [7,1]. Striatal volume was entered as covariate of no interest. All t tests were thresholded at P < .05
and corrected for false discovery rate. SPMs were superimposed on a single-subject high-resolution T1 image (color scale representing z values
from 0 to 6).

C. Sorg et al.

had significantly reduced power compared with controls
(P = .02). Patients during psychosis had a trend for reduced
power compared with controls (P = .08). Again, the other
ICs with striatal involvement did not differ across groups
and sessions for temporal aspects of striatal activity.
Intrinsic Striatal Activity Predicted Positive and Negative
Symptoms
To study the relation between increased striatal activity
and symptom dimensions, we correlated ROI-restricted
z scores with total PANSS scores in patients. The coordinates of ROIs for functional subdivisions of the striatum
(limbic/ventral and associative/dorsal) were independently derived from a previous brain imaging study.27
6

During psychosis, we found that synchronous activity
of the dorsal striatum correlated with total positive
(r = .53, P < .05) but not with negative (r = .02) symptoms
(partial correlation, corrected for striatal volume and
medication (CPZ), Bonferroni corrected for 4 tests);
during psychotic remission, the correlation between activity in the ventral striatum and total negative symptoms
demonstrated a trend to significance (r = .35, P = .09
corrected), while there was no relation to positive symptoms (r = .07). Post hoc analyses of correlations with
PANSS subscores revealed that the severity of delusions
and hallucinations during psychosis positively correlated
with activity increases within the associative striatum
(figure 3, supplementary table S5, P < .05). During
psychotic remission, the severity of blunted affect and

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

Fig. 3. Positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia are related to intrinsic activity in dorsal and ventral parts of the striatum. In patients,
the positive syndrome scale of positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) correlated with intrinsic activity in the dorsal striatum, while the
negative syndrome scale was related to activity in the ventral striatum. In this figure, PANSS subscores responsible for the overall syndromebrain relationship are plotted. From the positive syndrome scale, only (a) delusions and (b) hallucinations were significantly correlated with
coherent activity in the dorsal striatum (red region of interest [ROI], Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI)-coordinates: 624,12,027) during
psychosis (P < .05). The negative scores (c) blunted affect and (d) emotional withdrawal were significantly correlated with activity in the
ventral striatum (blue ROI, MNI: 612,9,927) during psychotic remission (P < .05). ROI-signals were calculated as averaged z scores across
left/right ROI from single-subject ICs of the basal ganglia network (figure 1). Partial correlations were corrected for striatal volume and
antipsychotic medication (CPZ).

Intrinsic Striatal Activity Predicts Symptom Dimensions

emotional withdrawal positively correlated with activity
increases within the limbic striatum (figure 3, supplementary table S5, P < .05).

Finally, we investigated whether medication or structural
changes in the striatum influence our result of coactivity
changes. For each subject, we summarized his/her medication in terms of chlorpromazine equivalents (CPZ)
and tested these for differences across disease states
and for any correlation with striatal connectivity
measures. We found no difference between psychosis
and psychotic remission for the patient group (paired t
test, P < .05, see table 1). Furthermore, the voxel-wise
correlation analysis—restricted to the striatum—between
z scores reflecting coactivity and CPZs across patients
during psychosis and psychotic remission respectively
revealed no significant correspondence (P < .05, FDRcorrected). Also, the analysis of volumetric data revealed
no significant group differences for the striatum between
healthy subjects and patients (P = .57).

We found that coherent intrinsic activity in the dorsal
striatum was increased during psychosis but not during
psychotic remission. Moreover, activity in the associative
part correlated with positive symptoms and particularly
with delusion and hallucination. With respect to regional
specificity and behavioral relevance, our result is well in
line with previous findings focusing on dopaminergic
dysfunctions.2,3 For example, Howes and colleagues2
found elevated dopamine function of the associative
striatum to be linked with positive signs in patients
with prodromal schizophrenia. The consistency between
our resting-state fMRI study and previous dopaminerelatedresting-state positronemissiontomographystudies
in terms of brain-behavior relations suggest a link between
intrinsic activity and dopamine dysfunction at rest.
Ventral Striatum Activity Correlates With Negative
Symptoms

This study revealed changed intrinsic striatal activity in
patients with schizophrenia. Changes were modulated
by psychosis and related to various symptom dimensions
in spatially distinct regions: Coherent intrinsic activity in
the dorsal striatum was increased during psychosis and
predictive for delusion and hallucination; the ventral striatum, however, showed increased activity during psychotic
remission and predicted blunted affect and emotional
withdrawal in the same patients. These findings extend
our knowledge about striatal dysfunction in schizophrenia
and suggest a link between intrinsic activity, symptom
dimensions, and possibly striatal dopamine dysfunction.

We found increased coherence of intrinsic activity in the
ventral striatum during psychotic remission corresponding
to blunted affect and emotional withdrawal in these patients. The ventral striatum is critically involved in emotion
processing and reward-based learning.30 In schizophrenia,
task-fMRI studies on reward and emotion processing also
revealed a link between activity changes in the ventral striatum and negative symptoms.31–33 We interpret the increase
of intrinsic connectivity in the ventral striatum with an increased frequency of negative symptom behavior. This is in
accordance with rs-fMRI data of healthy subjects where repetitive sensory experiences lead to increased intrinsic connectivity in sensory systems.26 Similarly, patients with major
depression (MD) suffer from frequent negative feelings or
repetitive behaviors such as rumination. Accordingly, studies on resting-state networks in MD reveal increased intrinsic connectivity in associated brain regions.34

The Link Between Changed Intrinsic Activity in the
Striatum and Symptom Dimensions in Schizophrenia

The Link Between Changed Spontaneous Activity in the
Striatum and Dopamine Dysfunction in Schizophrenia

The striatum is integrated into multiple cortico—basal
ganglia—cortical loops. The ventral part projects into
limbic, the associative part into associative, and the sensorimotor part into sensorimotor cortices.29,30 Activity
across these corticostriatal loops is coordinated particularly at the striatal level.30 In order to retrieve distinct
intrinsic networks with striatal contribution, we decomposed the rs-fMRI data with ICA and subsequently
analyzed several components. Voxel-wise z values in a component’s spatial map reflect the strength of functional connectivity to all other parts of this particular network.17,19
While we found no disease-related differences of functional connectivity in the cortical networks covering parts
of the basal ganglia, the BGN itself revealed strong changes
of coherent intrinsic activity within the striatum.

We found that increased intrinsic activity in the ventral and
dorsal striatum of patients differentially predicts disorder
states and symptom dimensions. Our finding of locally diverging dysfunctions in the striatum correspond well with
two distinct dopaminergic pathways: dopaminergic cells
in the ventral tegmentum release dopamine into the ventral
striatum and dopaminergic cells of the substantia nigra project to the dorsal striatum.35 Although direct evidence for an
interaction of intrinsic activity and dopamine signaling is
still missing, there is experimental evidence for a relationship
between dopamine levels and intrinsic activity in the dorsal
striatum of animals and humans. In monkeys, iontophoretically applied dopamine modulates the spontaneous firing
rate of neurons in the dorsal striatum,6 see also Goto et al.5
In patients suffering from Parkinson’s disease (PD), where

Discussion

7

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

Changes of Striatal Coactivity Are Not Explained by
Medication or Striatal Volume Changes

Dorsal Striatum Activity Correlates With Positive
Symptoms

C. Sorg et al.

schizophrenic patients depending on disorder state, medication, and duration of disorder,40 we did not find any
changes of striatal volume in our patient group.
A limitation of the study is the fact that we were not able
to recruit all 21 patients for another reexamination and
rescan during remission. Although all patients were in remission at the time of contact, 8 subjects did not agree to
return to the clinic due to several reasons. Furthermore, we
did not rescan HCs a second time as various test-retest studies with rs-fMRI data proved the consistency of the intrinsic
functional architecture across days and months.24,25 Although we cannot rule out any order effects in the patient
group, we conclude that the long-term shift that exclusively
occurred in the BGN and not in any other network is unlikely to be caused simply by changes over time.

Control Parameters and Limitations

Conclusions

The BGN consistently shows low-frequency BOLD signal
fluctuations across both groups, a typical characteristic of
functionally relevant intrinsic brain networks.19 However,
we also found slight differences in the low-frequency power
between healthy subjects and patients (supplementary figure S2). While the meaning of alterations in the frequency
range is still a matter of discussion,38 a recent study reported decreased low-frequency power in a cortical IC of
patients with schizophrenia.14 Together, our data provide
evidence for consistent changes of spatial and temporal
characteristics of intrinsic striatal activity in schizophrenia.
We also aimed at controlling for several parameters
related to the disease that might impact on our findings.
We therefore included medication and striatal volume as
confounding effects into the analyses.

Overall, we found intriguing similarities between changes of
intrinsic activity in the striatum, behavioral symptoms, and
previous dopamine findings. Increased coherent intrinsic
activity in the dorsal striatum during psychosis is predictive
for delusion and hallucination; increased activity during
psychotic remission in the ventral striatum is predictive
for blunted affect and emotional withdrawal in the same
patients. However, further studies exploring both a patient’s
dopamine function and intrinsic activity at the same time
would be needed to reveal any direct relation between aberrant striatal dopamine function and intrinsic activity.

Medication. It is important to note that the remitted subsample that we investigated approximately 9 months later
only differed with respect to symptom dimensions (PANSS)
but not with respect to medication and demographical
aspects. Still, drug effects might confound our results
from the group analysis compared with HCs. However, 2
recent studies found evidence that (1) the resting-state signal
in the striatum of drug-naı̈ve schizophrenic patients is also
increased16 suggesting that rs-fMRI effects are rather due to
the pathology than due to drug effects. And that (2) dopaminergic substitution in PD increases resting-state connectivity in the striatum.36,37 Therefore, any antidopaminergic
medication in our patients should even have a contrary effect on the coherent activity in the striatum.39 Finally, (3)
both direction and localization of change in spontaneous
activity were in accordance with the literature.3,16,36,37
Striatal Volume. It is also unlikely that increased striatal
spontaneous activity is due to volumetric changes; again,
we included striatal volume from a VBM analysis as variable of no interest into statistical analyses. Although a previous study observed volume reduction in the striatum of
8

Funding
This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research (BMBF 01EV0710 to A.M.W.),
the Alzheimer Forschung Initiative (AFI 08860 to V.R.),
the Kommission für Klinische Forschung of the Klinikum
Rechts der Isar der Technischen Universität München
(KKF 8765162 to C.S.), and through a bilatgrunn grant
from the Norwegian Research Council (to T.E.).
Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available at http://schizophre
niabulletin.oxfordjournals.org.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the participants of the study and the staff
of the Department of Psychiatry and Neuroradiology for
their help in recruitment and data collection. The authors
have declared that there are no conflicts of interest in
relation to the subject of this study.
References
1. Howes OD, Kapur S. The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia: version III—the final common pathway. Schizophr
Bull. 2009;35:549–562.

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

dopamine levels in the dorsal striatum are reduced due to
substantia nigra degeneration, resting-state fMRI data
show an increase of intrinsic activity in the dorsal striatum
after administration of levodopa, almost reaching levels of
healthy persons.36,37 In schizophrenia, psychosis is linked to
elevated striatal dopamine function in the associative
part,2,3 which corresponds well to our data of increased intrinsic activity also in the dorsal part of the striatum. Together, these results from various domains suggest
a potential link of intrinsic activity and dopamine signaling,
at least in the dorsal striatum, which is particularly altered
in patients with PD and schizophrenia. However, other
neurotransmitter systems and structural changes might
also impact on striatal dysfunction and should therefore
be investigated with respect to intrinsic brain activity.

Intrinsic Striatal Activity Predicts Symptom Dimensions

21. Kay SR, Fiszbein A, Opler LA. The positive and negative
syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull.
1987;13:261–276.
22. Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Gibbon M, First MB. The Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (SCID). I: History, rationale, and description. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1992;49:624–629.
23. Woods SW. Chlorpromazine equivalent doses for the newer
atypical antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;64:663–667.
24. Meindl T, Teipel S, Elmouden R, et al. Test-retest reproducibility of the default-mode network in healthy individuals.
Hum Brain Mapp. 2010;31:237–246.
25. Shehzad Z, Kelly AM, Reiss PT, et al. The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable. Cereb Cortex. 2009;19:2209–2229.
26. Riedl V, Valet M, Woller A, et al. Repeated pain induces
adaptations of intrinsic brain activity to reflect past and predict future pain. Neuroimage. 2011;57:206–213.
27. Martinez D, Slifstein M, Broft A, et al. Imaging human mesolimbic dopamine transmission with positron emission tomography. Part II: amphetamine-induced dopamine release
in the functional subdivisions of the striatum. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2003;23:285–300.
28. Ashburner J, Friston KJ. Unified segmentation. Neuroimage.
2005;26:839–851.
29. Alexander GE, DeLong MR, Strick PL. Parallel organization
of functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and
cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1986;9:357–381.
30. Graybiel AM. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. Annu
Rev Neurosci. 2008;31:359–387.
31. Dowd EC, Barch DM. Anhedonia and emotional experience
in schizophrenia: neural and behavioral indicators. Biol
Psychiatry. 2010;67:902–911.
32. Goghari VM, Sponheim SR, MacDonald AW. The functional
neuroanatomy of symptom dimensions in schizophrenia:
a qualitative and quantitative review of a persistent question.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2010;34:468–486.
33. Jensen J, Willeit M, Zipursky RB, et al. The formation of abnormal associations in schizophrenia: neural and behavioral
evidence. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;33:473–479.
34. Greicius MD, Flores BH, Menon V, et al. Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased
contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus.
Biol Psychiatry. 2007;62:429–437.
35. Moore RY, Bloom FE. Central catecholamine neuron
systems: anatomy and physiology of the dopamine systems.
Annu Rev Neurosci. 1978;1:129–169.
36. Wu T, Long X, Zang Y, et al. Regional homogeneity changes
in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Hum Brain Mapp.
2009;30:1502–1510.
37. Wu T, Wang L, Chen Y, Zhao C, Li K, Chan P. Changes of
functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting
state in Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Lett. 2009;460:6–10.
38. Niazy RK, Xie J, Miller K, Beckmann CF, Smith SM. Spectral characteristics of resting state networks. Prog Brain Res.
2011;193:259–276.
39. Kapur S, Mamo D. Half a century of antipsychotics and still
a central role for dopamine D2 receptors. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2003;27:1081–1090.
40. Ellison-Wright I, Glahn DC, Laird AR, Thelen SM, Bullmore E.
The anatomy of first-episode and chronic schizophrenia: an anatomical likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry.
2008;165:1015–1023.

9

Downloaded from http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/ at Universitatsbibliothek der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen Zweigbibliothe on January 13, 2012

2. Howes OD, Montgomery AJ, Asselin MC, et al. Elevated
striatal dopamine function linked to prodromal signs of
schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009;66:13–20.
3. Kegeles LS, Abi-Dargham A, Frankle WG, et al. Increased
synaptic dopamine function in associative regions of the striatum in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:231–239.
4. Agid O, Mamo D, Ginovart N, et al. Striatal vs extrastriatal
dopamine D2 receptors in antipsychotic response—a doubleblind PET study in schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2007;32:1209–1215.
5. Goto Y, Otani S, Grace AA. The Yin and Yang of dopamine release: a new perspective. Neuropharmacology. 2007;53:583–587.
6. Rolls ET, Thorpe SJ, Boytim M, Szabo I, Perrett DI.
Responses of striatal neurons in the behaving monkey. 3.
Effects of iontophoretically applied dopamine on normal responsiveness. Neuroscience. 1984;12:1201–1212.
7. Grace AA. Phasic versus tonic dopamine release and the
modulation of dopamine system responsivity: a hypothesis
for the etiology of schizophrenia. Neuroscience. 1991;41:1–24.
8. Rolls ET, Loh M, Deco G, Winterer G. Computational models of schizophrenia and dopamine modulation in the prefrontal cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9:696–709.
9. Corlett PR, Taylor JR, Wang XJ, Fletcher PC, Krystal JH.
Toward a neurobiology of delusions. Prog Neurobiol. 2010;
92:345–369.
10. Fletcher PC, Frith CD. Perceiving is believing: a Bayesian approach to explaining the positive symptoms of schizophrenia.
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009;10:48–58.
11. Kapur S. Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a framework linking biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology
in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160:13–23.
12. Lynall ME, Bassett DS, Kerwin R, et al. Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia. J Neurosci. 2010;
30:9477–9487.
13. Bluhm RL, Miller J, Lanius RA, et al. Spontaneous low-frequency
fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients:
anomalies in the default network. Schizophr Bull. 2007;33:
1004–1012.
14. Garrity AG, Pearlson GD, McKiernan K, Lloyd D, Kiehl KA,
Calhoun VD. Aberrant ‘‘default mode’’ functional connectivity in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164:450–457.
15. Lui S, Li T, Deng W, et al. Short-term effects of antipsychotic
treatment on cerebral function in drug-naive first-episode
schizophrenia revealed by ‘‘resting state’’ functional magnetic
resonance imaging. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:783–792.
16. Huang XQ, Lui S, Deng W, et al. Localization of cerebral
functional deficits in treatment-naive, first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI. Neuroimage. 2010;49:
2901–2906.
17. Calhoun VD, Adali T, Pearlson GD, Pekar JJ. A method for
making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis. Hum Brain Mapp. 2001;14:140–151.
18. Robinson S, Basso G, Soldati N, et al. A resting state network
in the motor control circuit of the basal ganglia. BMC Neurosci. 2009;10:137.
19. Beckmann CF, DeLuca M, Devlin JT, Smith SM. Investigations
into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2005;360:1001–1013.
20. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders—DSM IV—TR. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000.

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Supplementary Tables
Table S1. Individual subject medication protocol and dosage
Patient_ID

First scan during acute state of
psychosis

Second scan during state of
remission

1	  

20	  mg	  Olanzapine	  
100	  mg	  Clozapine,	  80	  mg	  
Ziprasidone	  
30	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  15	  mg	  
Aripiprazole	  
10	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  5	  mg	  
Risperidone	  
30	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  5	  mg	  
Risperiodone	  
NO	  medication	  
12,5	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  6	  mg	  
Paliperidone	  
NO	  medication	  
20	  mg	  Olanzapine	  
400	  mg	  Quetiapine,	  9	  mg	  
Paliperidone	  
25	  mg	  Olanzapine	  
30	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  50mg	  
Clozapine	  
30	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  5	  mg	  
Risperidone	  
400	  mg	  Quetiapine,	  5	  mg	  
Risperidone	  
25	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  50	  mg	  
Clozapine	  
400	  mg	  Amilsupride,	  5mg	  
Risperidone	  

400	  mg	  Clozapine	  

2	  
3	  
4	  
5	  
6	  
7	  
8	  
9	  
10	  
11	  
12	  
13	  
14	  
15	  
16	  
17	  
18	  
19	  
20	  
21	  

	  

NO	  medication	  
200	  mg	  Amilsupride,	  15	  mg	  
Aripiprazol	  
30	  mg	  Olanzapine,	  400	  mg	  
Quetiapine	  
15	  mg	  Olanzapine	  
200	  mg	  Clozapine,	  12mg	  
Paliperidone	  

NO	  medication	  
no	  second	  scan	  
2	  mg	  Risperidone	  
no	  second	  scan	  
no	  second	  scan	  
NO	  medication	  
6	  mg	  Paliperidone	  
12,5	  Olanzapine	  
NO	  medication	  
NO	  medication	  
300	  mg	  Clozapine	  
600	  mg	  Quetiapine	  
no	  second	  scan	  
no	  second	  scan	  
600	  mg	  Amilsupride,	  400	  mg	  
Quetiapine	  
600	  mg	  Quetiapine,	  5	  mg	  
Risperidone	  
no	  second	  scan	  
no	  second	  scan	  
no	  second	  scan	  
450	  mg	  Clozapine,	  15	  mg	  
Aripiprazole	  

68	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Table S2. Striatal contributions to brain networks in healthy controls: Spatial
Regression
Network

Spatial
one-sample-tRegression test, FDRcoefficient corrected

Basal Ganglia Network
Artefact (White Matter)
Artefact (White Matter)
Lateral Temporal Network
Hippocampal Cingular Network
Salience Network

0.393
0.006
0.005
0.002
0.001
0.0001

two-sample-ttest, SP vs. HC,
FDR-corrected

p<0.05 (Fig 1)
p<0.05
p<0.05
p<0.05 (Fig S1)
p<0.05 (Fig S1)
p<0.05 (Fig S1)

none
none
none
none

A multiple spatial regression was conducted using a mask comprising the bilateral striatum (Putamen, globus pallidus, caudate
nucleus) to identify independent components covering the striatum. For all networks with spatial regression coefficient >0.0001,
a one-sample-t-test was performed to investigate the statistical significance of striatal contributions. For all networks with
significant striatal co-activations (p<0,05, FDR-corrected), a two-sample-t-test between HC and SP was performed. The tests
yielded no significant between-group differences.

Table S3. Striatal contributions to cortical-subcortical intrinsic brain networks in
healthy controls: one-sample-t-test, FDR-corrected, see Figure S1, Table S2.
Anatomical region L/R cluster
Lateral Temporal network
Operculum
R
1720
Superior temporal
R
gyrus
Operculum
L
1864
Precuneus
R
91
Lingual Gyrus
L
101
Anterior cingulate
R
170
cortex
Middle cingulate cortex
R
170
Cerebellum VII
L
17
Caudate Nucleus
R
24
Postcentral Gyrus
R
8
Superior frontal gyrus
L
21
Lingual Gyrus
R
24
Middle cingulate cortex
R
24
Middle orbital gyrus
R
19
Cerebellum Crus 2
L
10
Cerebellum IX
L
20
Hippocampal-insular-cingular network
Insula Lobe
R
2568
Hippocampus
L
2668
Hippocampus
R
2568
Superior temporal
L
1227
gyrus
Insula Lobe
L
1227
Anterior cingulate
L
428
cortex
Middle occipital gyrus
L
39
Thalamus
L
61
Caudate Nucleus
L
24

	  

Z-score

p-value (FDRcorected)

MNI (x,y,z)

7,73

<0,001

57, -15, 9

6,95

<0,001

48, -33, 12

7,34
4,79
4,56

<0,001
<0,001
<0,001

-48, -30, 15
12, -48, 69
-18, -54, -3

3,96

<0,001

6, 15, 27

3,96
3,83
3,66
3,64
3,63
3,53
3,10
3,47
3,45
3,37

<0,001
6, 24, 30
<0,001 -24, -72, -45
0,001
12,12, 0
0,001
60, -15, 48
0,001
-18, 33, 39
0,001
15, -45, -3
0,001
9, -52, 36
0,001
36, 54, -3
0,001 -42, -69, -39
0,001 -15, -54, -42

7,28
6,14
5,95

<0,001
48, 9, -6
<0,001 -15. -27, -12
<0,001 18, -33, -12

7,21

<0,001

-57, 3, 0

6,36

<0,001

-24, 3, 6

6,34

<0,001

0, 39, 12

5,12
4,84
4,59

<0,001
<0,001
<0,001

-36, -72, 33
-3, -18, 3
-9, 6, 3

69	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Middle frontal gyrus
Superior frontal gyrus
Middle cingulate cortex
Salience Network
Superior medial gyrus
Middle cingulate cortex
Middle cingulate cortex
Insula Lobe
Caudate Nucleus
Insula Lobe
Cerebellum Crus 1
Cerebellum Crus 1
Precuneus
Precuneus
Thalamus

L
L
R

77
77
14

4,55
3,59
3,06

R
R
L
R
R
L
R
L
L
R
L

3900
3900
3900
670
670
727
181
227
727
113
37

7,65
7,61
7,45
6,89
5,64
6,46
6,21
5,97
4,58
3,62
3,95

Valentin Riedl, 2012

0,001
0,001
0,001

-33, 48, 12
-21, 57, 18
6, -36, 48

<0,001
6, 21, 42
<0,001
6, 30, 30
<0,001
-3, 24, 36
<0,001
48, 15, -3
<0,001
15, 12, 3
<0,001
-45, 12, -6
<0,001 39, -63, -27
<0,001 -39, -60, -27
0,001
-9, -51, 12
0,001
18, -60, 42
<0,001 -12, -15, 15

Table S4. Striatal subregions of changed spontaneous activity in patients with
schizophrenia during psychosis and psychotic remission
Functional subdivisions
(a) SP > HC
Associative striatum
Sensorimotor Striatum

Anatomical subdivisions
(peak voxel)
Precommissural dorsal putamen
postcommissural dorsal putamen

L/R

p-value

MNI (x, y, z)

L
R
L
R

0,005*
0,007*
0,018*
0,002*

-27, 6, 6
24, 15, 3
-27, -6, 3
24, 12, -9

L

0,019*

-15, 9, -6

R

0,038*

12, 6, -9

(b) SPR > HC
Limbic striatum

Precommissural ventral putamen

*Significant for p<0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons (for comparisons SP vs HC and SPR vs HC two-sample t-test,
corrected for striatal volume). Abbreviations: SP: patients with schizophrenia during psychosis; SPR: patients with schizophrenia
during psychotic remission; HC: healthy controls

Table S5. Post-hoc tests for correlations between positive/negative PANSS subscores
and striatal coactivity for significant total PANSS score correlations.
SP

SPR

Dorsal / Associative
striatum

Ventral / Limbic
striatum

Positive subscores
Delusions (P1) 0,505*
Conceptual disorganization (P2) -0,025
Hallucinations (P3) 0,582*
Hyperactivity (P4) 0,521
Grandiosity (P5) 0,033
Suspiciousness/persecution (P6) 0,166

	  

70	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Hostility (P7) 0,185
Negative subscores
Blunted affect (N1)

0,775**

Emotional withdrawal (N2)

0,854**
0,377

Poor rapport (N3)
Passive/apathetic social withdrawal
(N4)

0,372

Difficulty in abstract thinking (N5)
Lack of spontaneity and flow of
conversation (N6)

-0,284

Stereotyped thinking (N7)

-0,332

-0,102

Significant for *p<0.05, **p<0.005 partial correlation, corrected for striatal volume and chlorpromazine equivalent dose (CPZ).
Abbreviations: SP: patients with schizophrenia during psychosis; SPR: patients with schizophrenia during psychotic remission.

Supplementary Figures
Figure S1. Additional intrinsic brain networks comprising parts of the striatum as
revealed by the multiple spatial regression analysis (see Tables S2, S3).

	  
	  

	  

71	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Figure S2. Spectral power of time courses of the basal ganglia network for patients and
healthy controls.

The three frequency-power plots represent spectral power density of time courses of the basal
ganglia network for healthy controls (HC), patients during psychosis (SP), and patients during
psychotic remission (SPR). The bar plots (bottom) reflect average spectral power in the
frequency range of 0.01 – 0.1 Hz for each group. During psychotic remission patients’
spectral power is significantly reduced compared with controls (p=0.02) and during psychosis
a trend for reduced power remains (p=0.08).
	  
	  

72	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

12 Discussion	  
The	  resting	  brain	  hosts	  intrinsic	  networks	  of	  coherent	  ongoing	  neuronal	  activity	  
between	  distributed	  brain	  regions5,14.	  These	  ICNs	  persist	  in	  humans	  across	  the	  whole	  
life	  span38-­‐41,	  during	  waking	  and	  sleep42,43,	  and	  even	  in	  complete	  unconsciousness	  like	  in	  
patients	  in	  a	  vegetative	  state65.	  Moreover,	  ICNs	  occur	  in	  anaesthetized	  rats	  and	  
monkeys35,36.	  Therefore	  the	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  of	  coherent	  brain	  activity	  is	  
a	  fundamental	  organizational	  principle	  of	  the	  brain.	  	  
	  
We	  participated	  in	  a	  multi-­‐center	  study	  of	  35	  research	  groups	  that	  defined	  the	  intrinsic	  
functional	  architecture	  of	  ongoing	  brain	  activity	  as	  an	  emerging	  tool	  for	  discovery	  
science	  of	  the	  brain37.	  The	  study	  reported	  several	  FC	  methods	  that	  consistently	  detect	  
ICNs	  of	  coherent	  low-­‐frequency	  BOLD	  fluctuations	  in	  rs-­‐fMRI	  data.	  This	  is	  in	  accordance	  
with	  other	  studies	  performing	  test-­‐retest	  analyses	  of	  data	  from	  the	  same	  subjects	  across	  
days	  and	  months30,66-­‐68.	  Despite	  this	  overall	  consistency	  of	  ICNs,	  our	  study	  also	  revealed	  
effects	  of	  age	  and	  sex	  on	  network	  connectivity.	  While	  changes	  related	  to	  sex	  were	  subtle	  
in	  our	  as	  in	  other	  studies32,	  age	  effects	  were	  more	  prominent.	  Most	  studies	  investigating	  
the	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  across	  the	  life	  span	  report	  overall	  uncoupling,	  or	  
decreased	  FC	  of	  mainly	  long-­‐range	  connections	  that	  might	  start	  as	  early	  as	  in	  young	  
adulthood32,41.	  	  	  
	  
12.1

Organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  influences	  behavior	  in	  healthy	  subjects	  

We	  then	  investigated	  the	  behavioral	  relevance	  of	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity.	  
Specifically,	  we	  explored	  whether	  variations	  in	  sensory	  experiences	  relate	  to	  altered	  
patterns	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  the	  resting	  state,	  beyond	  the	  immediate	  experience.	  
First,	  we	  tested	  short-­‐term	  modulation	  of	  ICN	  activity	  by	  exposing	  healthy	  subjects	  to	  
repeated	  painful	  stimulation	  across	  11	  consecutive	  days59.	  In	  a	  different	  study	  we	  
explored	  long-­‐term	  differences	  in	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity.	  We	  tested	  whether	  
aberrant	  visual	  perception	  of	  synesthetes,	  healthy	  subjects	  that	  consistently	  perceive	  
unimodal	  stimuli	  (grey	  letters)	  as	  multimodal	  stimuli	  (grey	  letters	  as	  colored	  letters;	  
letters	  associated	  with	  tones)	  is	  related	  to	  permanent	  changes	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  brain	  
architecture	  (Dovern	  et	  al,	  J	  Neurosci,	  under	  revision).	  
	  

	  

73	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

In	  the	  study	  on	  short-­‐term	  plasticity	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  we	  exposed	  healthy	  
subjects	  to	  identical	  painful	  stimuli	  on	  11	  consecutive	  days	  and	  explored	  intrinsic	  FC	  in	  
ICNs	  during	  rest	  before	  (preREST)	  and	  after	  (postREST)	  stimulation.	  On	  a	  network	  level,	  
we	  found	  that	  repeated	  pain	  selectively	  increased	  FC	  in	  the	  sensorimotor	  ICN	  (SMN)	  
during	  postREST.	  We	  also	  found	  that	  the	  degree	  of	  increased	  FC	  during	  postREST	  
correlated	  with	  the	  subjective	  experience	  of	  pain	  intensity	  the	  subjects	  had	  during	  
stimulation.	  After	  11	  days,	  FC	  of	  the	  ventromedial	  prefrontal	  cortex	  (vmPFC)	  in	  the	  SMN	  
even	  predicted	  the	  intensity	  a	  subject	  will	  perceive	  during	  the	  final,	  forthcoming	  
stimulation.	  This	  study	  revealed	  experimentally	  induced	  plasticity	  of	  organized	  intrinsic	  
brain	  activity	  in	  response	  to	  repeated	  pain.	  
	  
These	  results	  on	  modulated	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  with	  repeated	  pain	  are	  in	  line	  with	  
task-­‐fMRI	  studies	  testing	  acute	  pain	  processing.	  While	  somatosensory	  cortices	  process	  
sensory	  discriminatory	  information	  of	  a	  pain	  sensation,	  the	  vmPFC	  has	  been	  ascribed	  a	  
modulatory	  role	  in	  pain	  perception69-­‐71.	  Hence,	  our	  data	  show	  that	  repeated	  pain	  
selectively	  alters	  intrinsic	  connectivity	  between	  brain	  regions	  initially	  involved	  in	  
processing	  acute	  pain	  sensations.	  	  
“Chronic	  pain	  is	  a	  state	  of	  continuous	  learning”72.	  In	  our	  study,	  predictive	  coding	  in	  the	  
vmPFC	  only	  evolved	  after	  subjects	  had	  repeatedly	  experienced,	  or	  learned,	  this	  
particular	  situation.	  The	  anticipatory	  role	  of	  the	  vmPFC	  in	  the	  resting	  state	  might	  
account	  for	  this	  learning	  effect.	  The	  literature	  on	  pain	  processing	  shows	  opposite	  
directions	  of	  prefrontal	  activity	  between	  healthy	  subjects	  and	  patients	  suffering	  from	  
chronic	  pain70,71,73.	  Healthy	  subjects	  that	  habituate	  to	  repeated	  pain	  show	  decreased	  
activation	  in	  prefrontal	  cortex	  during	  pain	  processing71.	  In	  chronic	  pain	  patients,	  
however,	  vmPFC	  is	  the	  only	  region	  within	  the	  pain	  network	  being	  more	  strongly	  
involved	  in	  pain	  processing	  as	  compared	  to	  normal	  subjects70.	  Our	  data	  imply	  that	  a	  
painful	  experience	  is	  not	  only	  coded	  by	  immediate	  changes	  of	  neuronal	  activity	  but	  also	  
in	  coherent	  ongoing	  brain	  activity	  during	  rest.	  Furthermore	  aberrant	  plasticity	  in	  the	  
intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  might	  be	  related	  to	  chronic	  pain	  states.	  	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

74	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

In	  the	  following,	  I	  will	  relate	  the	  changes	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  we	  found	  in	  response	  
to	  pain	  to	  similar	  changes	  observed	  in	  other	  sensory	  and	  cognitive	  modalities.	  
Robertson	  et	  al	  showed	  that	  learning	  of	  a	  difficult	  spatial	  navigation	  task	  across	  several	  
minutes	  changes	  FC	  in	  the	  resting	  state	  immediately	  after	  the	  task57.	  These	  changes	  
selectively	  occurred	  in	  an	  ICN	  supposed	  to	  process	  attention	  to	  spatial	  information.	  In	  a	  
different	  study,	  subjects	  had	  to	  detect	  a	  visual	  target	  on	  a	  screen	  and	  learned	  this	  task	  
for	  several	  hours60.	  Again,	  the	  FC	  of	  primary	  visual	  and	  attention	  related	  brain	  regions	  
increased	  from	  the	  resting	  state	  before	  learning	  the	  task	  to	  the	  resting	  state	  after	  
successful	  performance	  of	  the	  task.	  Together,	  these	  and	  our	  data	  show	  that	  
configurations	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  change	  with	  the	  repeated	  experience	  or	  
performance	  of	  somatosensory,	  visual	  and	  motor	  tasks.	  This	  suggests	  that	  ICNs	  of	  
certain	  functional	  entities	  are	  integrated	  into	  a	  stable	  architecture	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  
activity,	  and	  are	  selectively	  modulated	  by	  recent	  experiences	  or	  different	  cognitive	  
states.	  A	  possible	  interpretation	  of	  these	  data	  is	  that	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  might	  be	  
involved	  in	  memory	  coding	  of	  past	  experiences	  and	  continuously	  adapts	  with	  learning.	  
Two	  recent	  studies	  explored	  the	  FC	  of	  the	  hippocampus	  as	  an	  integrator	  of	  new	  
memories	  with	  the	  cortex	  after	  learning	  tasks.	  Both	  studies	  showed	  that	  coherent	  brain	  
activity	  between	  hippocampi	  and	  cortex	  was	  increased	  in	  the	  resting	  state	  after	  a	  
memory	  task74	  and	  this	  FC	  correlated	  with	  later	  memory	  retrieval75.	  	  
	  
In	  addition	  to	  above	  described	  short-­‐term	  modulations	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity,	  we	  
also	  investigated	  state	  dependent	  differences	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture.	  
Individuals	  with	  synaesthesia	  are	  healthy	  subjects	  with	  altered	  sensory	  experiences	  
since	  birth76.	  They	  report	  additional	  color	  perceptions	  while	  viewing	  numbers	  or	  letters.	  
These	  additional	  experiences	  are	  stable	  across	  years	  (e.g.	  an	  “a”	  always	  occurs	  in	  light	  
blue)	  and	  are	  hypothesized	  to	  relate	  to	  hyperconnectivity	  between	  visual	  grapheme,	  
color	  and	  multimodal	  integration	  sites	  in	  the	  cortex77,78.	  We	  therefore	  investigated	  
organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  ICNs	  covering	  primary	  sensory	  and	  integration	  sites	  
in	  subjects	  with	  synaesthesia	  and	  controls	  (Dovern	  et	  al,	  J	  Neurosci,	  under	  revision).	  We	  
found	  both	  a	  global	  and	  a	  specific	  (visual	  to	  fronto-­‐parietal	  networks)	  increase	  of	  FC	  in	  
grapheme-­‐color	  synaesthesia.	  Moreover,	  this	  increased	  intrinsic	  network	  connectivity	  
reflected	  the	  strength	  of	  synaesthetic	  experiences.	  This	  is	  the	  first	  study	  to	  investigate	  
organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  synaesthetes	  and	  also	  first	  evidence	  for	  increased	  
functional	  hyperconnectivity	  in	  synaesthesia.	  
	  

75	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Beyond	  a	  better	  understanding	  of	  the	  neural	  mechanisms	  of	  synaesthesia,	  our	  results	  fit	  
into	  recent	  approaches	  investigating	  influences	  of	  inherited	  or	  acquired	  variations	  of	  
intrinsic	  brain	  circuits	  on	  human	  behavior	  like	  feeling,	  experiences,	  and	  action	  patterns.	  
The	  question	  is	  if	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  is	  linked	  to	  emotional	  and	  cognitive	  
functions.	  Seeley	  and	  colleagues	  showed	  that	  FC	  in	  a	  salience	  related	  ICN	  (SN)	  
comprising	  anterior	  cingulate	  cortex	  and	  bilateral	  insula	  correlated	  with	  the	  level	  of	  
anxiety	  measured	  in	  prescan	  resting	  state	  before	  the	  fMRI	  session61.	  In	  another	  study,	  
Hampson	  et	  al.	  showed	  that	  the	  strength	  of	  FC	  in	  the	  default	  mode	  network	  (DMN)	  
correlated	  with	  performance	  on	  a	  working	  memory	  task,	  during	  the	  task	  and	  also	  during	  
postTASK	  resting	  state79.	  A	  very	  recent	  study	  also	  showed	  correlations	  between	  FC	  
measures	  and	  personality	  traits80.	  In	  combination,	  our	  data	  suggest	  that	  differences	  in	  
intrinsic	  network	  connectivity	  are	  directly	  related	  to	  the	  phenomenology	  of	  human	  
experiences	  and	  continuously	  change	  with	  further	  experiences.	  	  
	  
12.2

Intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks	  and	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases	  

Our	  final	  two	  studies	  explored	  disease	  related	  changes	  of	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  
activity	  in	  neuropsychiatric	  patients.	  In	  healthy	  subjects	  the	  intrinsic	  functional	  
architecture	  of	  organized	  brain	  activity	  is	  rather	  robust	  with	  only	  subtle	  changes	  
occurring	  across	  lifetime.	  Neuroimaging	  of	  brain	  development	  in	  preterms	  or	  during	  
adolescence	  revealed	  that	  several	  aspects	  of	  ICNs	  are	  already	  present	  at	  birth81,82,	  while	  
others,	  especially	  long-­‐range	  connections,	  continuously	  change	  during	  adulthood	  and	  
aging40,41,81,83.	  Furthermore,	  data	  from	  colleagues	  and	  our	  own	  work	  on	  network	  
adaptations	  in	  healthy	  subjects	  suggest	  that	  the	  ensemble	  of	  ICNs	  is	  crucial	  for	  
behavior59-­‐61.	  Therefore	  several	  groups	  have	  hypothesized	  that	  the	  connectivity	  within	  
and	  between	  ICNs	  might	  be	  altered	  in	  neuropsychiatric	  diseases	  such	  as	  schizophrenia,	  
major	  depression,	  Attention	  Deficit	  Hyperactivity	  Disorder	  (ADHD)	  or	  Parkinson’s	  
Disease84,85	  and	  have	  tried	  to	  link	  changes	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  to	  
disease	  related	  symptoms.	  
	  
We	  reported	  the	  first	  network-­‐wide	  analysis	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  comparing	  a	  
group	  of	  neuropsychiatric	  patients	  with	  healthy	  controls.	  We	  analyzed	  patients	  with	  
early	  AD,	  Mild	  Cognitive	  Impairment	  (MCI),	  and	  found	  prominent	  alterations	  in	  only	  2	  
out	  of	  8	  ICNs	  in	  the	  patient	  group63.	  The	  MCI	  patients	  had	  severely	  impaired	  FC	  in	  the	  
	  

76	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

DMN	  and	  an	  attention	  related	  ICN	  comprising	  cortical	  midline	  structures,	  parietal	  
cortices	  and	  hippocampus.	  All	  other	  ICNs,	  especially	  primary	  sensory	  systems	  remained	  
unchanged.	  Most	  importantly,	  cortical	  regions	  with	  affected	  FC	  are	  key	  regions	  for	  
structural	  deficits	  in	  later	  stages	  of	  AD.	  As	  we	  could	  exclude	  any	  structural	  deficits	  in	  the	  
patient	  group,	  we	  suggest	  that	  the	  subtle	  memory	  and	  behavioral	  deficits	  of	  the	  patients	  
might	  rather	  be	  related	  to	  the	  functional	  connectivity	  deficits	  we	  observed	  in	  organized	  
intrinsic	  brain	  activity.	  	  
	  
Our	  study	  was	  an	  initial	  rs-­‐fMRI	  approach	  to	  test	  the	  hypothesis	  of	  AD	  being	  a	  
disconnection	  syndrome86.	  Earlier,	  Greicius	  and	  colleagues	  already	  revealed	  uncoupling	  
of	  long-­‐range	  FC	  selectively	  in	  the	  DMN	  of	  patients	  with	  AD87	  which	  was	  followed	  by	  a	  
similar	  results	  in	  whole	  brain	  analyses	  of	  FC88	  as	  well	  as	  SC89.	  Additionally,	  local	  
measures	  of	  the	  amplitude	  of	  LFF	  also	  revealed	  disease	  related	  differences	  in	  similar	  
brain	  patterns90.	  Overall	  these	  data	  suggest	  that	  AD	  patients	  are	  associated	  with	  
abnormalities	  in	  large-­‐scale	  brain	  networks	  which	  might	  provide	  new	  insights	  into	  the	  
disease	  mechanism91.	  
	  
In	  addition	  to	  cortical	  ICNs	  that	  we	  investigated	  in	  MCI,	  we	  also	  studied	  intrinsic	  brain	  
activity	  of	  a	  subcortical	  ICN	  in	  different	  stages	  of	  schizophrenia64.	  Striatal	  dysfunction	  is	  
thought	  to	  be	  a	  fundamental	  element	  in	  schizophrenia.	  Striatal	  dopamine	  dysfunction	  
impacts	  on	  reward	  processing	  and	  learning	  and	  is	  present	  even	  at	  rest.	  We	  acquired	  rs-­‐
fMRI	  data	  and	  psychometric	  assessment	  in	  schizophrenic	  patients	  during	  psychosis	  and	  
during	  remission	  9	  months	  later.	  We	  found	  that	  during	  psychosis,	  coherent	  intrinsic	  
activity	  of	  the	  striatum	  was	  increased	  in	  the	  dorsal	  part	  and	  correlated	  with	  positive	  
symptoms	  such	  as	  delusion	  and	  hallucination.	  In	  psychotic	  remission	  of	  the	  same	  
patients	  activity	  of	  the	  ventral	  striatum	  was	  increased	  and	  correlated	  with	  negative	  
symptoms	  such	  as	  emotional	  withdrawal	  and	  blunted	  affect.	  Our	  finding	  of	  altered	  
intrinsic	  activity	  in	  distinct	  parts	  of	  the	  striatum	  depending	  on	  predominant	  
schizophrenic	  symptoms	  supports	  previous	  transmitter	  studies	  on	  schizophrenia.	  PET	  
imaging	  revealed	  that	  elevated	  dopamine	  function	  of	  the	  associative,	  or	  dorsal	  striatum	  
correlated	  with	  positive	  signs	  in	  patients	  with	  prodromal	  schizophrenia92.	  These	  
findings	  extend	  our	  knowledge	  about	  striatal	  dysfunction	  in	  schizophrenia	  and	  suggest	  a	  
link	  between	  intrinsic	  activity,	  symptom	  dimensions,	  and	  possibly	  striatal	  dopamine	  
dysfunction.	  
	  

77	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Although	  we	  concentrated	  on	  subcortical	  ICNs	  in	  this	  study,	  colleagues	  also	  found	  global	  
alterations	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  architecture	  of	  cortical	  networks	  in	  schizophrenia.	  Early	  work	  
described	  decreased	  FC	  within	  the	  DMN	  of	  patients	  during	  rest93,94.	  However,	  further	  
network	  metrics	  exist	  that	  reflect	  the	  global	  efficiency	  in	  communication	  between	  
several	  large	  scale	  brain	  networks.	  In	  schizophrenia,	  these	  measures	  reveal	  less	  strongly	  
integrated	  configuration	  within	  and	  between	  several	  ICNs.	  E.g.	  Lynall	  et	  al.	  showed	  
globally	  reduced	  strength	  of	  FC,	  whereas	  diversity	  of	  functional	  connections	  was	  
increased95.	  Topologically,	  functional	  brain	  networks	  in	  schizophrenia	  had	  reduced	  
clustering	  and	  small-­‐worldness,	  reduced	  probability	  of	  high-­‐degree	  hubs,	  and	  increased	  
robustness	  in	  the	  schizophrenic	  group95,96.	  These	  data	  suggest	  that	  patients	  with	  
schizophrenia	  have	  a	  less	  strongly	  integrated	  and	  diverse	  profile	  of	  subcortical	  and	  
cortical	  intrinsic	  brain	  networks	  already	  in	  the	  resting	  state.	  
	  
12.3

Overall	  conclusion	  on	  organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  	  

Subjects	  at	  rest	  dedicate	  the	  largest	  amount	  of	  energy	  to	  the	  brain3.	  This	  fuels	  ongoing	  
neuronal	  activity	  that	  is	  not	  random	  noise	  but	  is	  organized	  into	  large-­‐scale	  networks	  of	  
coherent	  low-­‐frequency	  signal	  fluctuations	  in	  fMRI14.	  Organized	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  
therefore	  is	  a	  fundamental	  and	  ubiquitous	  organizational	  principle	  of	  the	  brain	  yet	  its	  
functional	  meaning	  is	  still	  largely	  unknown.	  Early	  work	  on	  the	  intrinsic	  functional	  
architecture	  suggested	  that	  patterns	  of	  FC	  simply	  reflect	  underlying	  anatomical	  
connections,	  or	  SC,	  between	  brain	  regions36,48.	  This	  is	  supported	  by	  the	  fact	  that	  intrinsic	  
brain	  activity	  forms	  patterns	  of	  ICNs	  robustly	  occurring	  in	  several	  species35,36,	  across	  
time	  (test-­‐retest	  reliability)66-­‐68,	  and	  even	  in	  states	  of	  altered	  consciousness44.	  However,	  
recent	  data	  clearly	  showed	  that	  only	  a	  certain	  amount	  (25%)	  of	  distinct	  brain	  regions	  is	  
indeed	  coupled	  by	  FC	  when	  also	  strong	  SC	  is	  present49.	  As	  soon	  as	  polysynaptic	  
connections	  are	  assumed	  on	  the	  structural	  level,	  no	  correlation	  exists	  with	  FC	  patterns.	  
Moreover,	  a	  prominent	  feature	  of	  certain	  ICNs	  is	  strong	  FC	  between	  contralateral	  
hemispheres	  where	  no	  direct	  anatomical	  connections	  exist	  (e.g.	  bilateral	  occipital	  
cortices).	  Therefore,	  SC	  can	  only	  partly	  explain	  coherent	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  ICNs.	  	  
	  
This	  implies	  that	  the	  volatile	  aspects	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  should	  be	  inspected	  in	  
more	  detail.	  Several	  studies	  reported	  that	  the	  emotional	  or	  cognitive	  state	  of	  a	  subject	  is	  
partly	  related	  to	  FC	  in	  certain	  ICNs.	  E.g.	  the	  level	  of	  anxiety	  or	  anticipated	  pain	  can	  
already	  be	  implied	  from	  the	  coherence	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  certain	  networks59,61.	  
	  

78	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

Furthermore,	  we	  have	  shown	  that	  consistent	  differences	  in	  subjective	  experiences	  of	  
primary	  sensory	  processing	  can	  be	  predicted	  from	  an	  altered	  intrinsic	  brain	  architecture	  
(Dovern	  et	  al,	  J	  Neurosci,	  under	  revision).	  But	  modulations	  of	  FC	  even	  occur	  on	  shorter	  
time	  scale	  of	  days	  or	  seconds.	  We	  have	  shown	  that	  the	  repeated	  experience	  of	  an	  
identical	  painful	  stimulation	  leads	  to	  plasticity	  in	  the	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture59.	  
Fox	  and	  colleagues	  even	  showed	  immediate	  influence	  of	  the	  strength	  of	  FC	  in	  the	  motor	  
system	  on	  the	  motor	  force	  a	  subject	  applied	  to	  a	  lever	  on	  a	  trial-­‐by-­‐trial	  basis97.	  	  
	  
We	  therefore	  suggest	  two	  layers	  of	  processing	  inherited	  in	  ongoing	  brain	  activity	  of	  
large	  scale	  brain	  networks.	  On	  the	  one	  hand,	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  forms	  a	  robust	  
architecture	  of	  consistent	  ICNs	  reflecting	  mainly	  anatomical	  connections.	  On	  the	  other	  
hand,	  immediate	  changes	  in	  the	  coherence	  of	  spontaneous	  activity	  relate	  to	  fluctuations	  
in	  cognitive	  functions	  and	  motor	  behavior.	  This	  suggests	  a	  volatile	  layer	  of	  intrinsic	  
brain	  fluctuations	  influencing	  behavior	  in	  the	  range	  of	  seconds.	  We	  hypothesize	  that	  
with	  continuous	  experiences,	  coherent	  intrinsic	  activity	  might	  stabilize	  networks	  of	  
brain	  regions	  that	  are	  commonly	  activated	  together	  during	  sensory	  or	  cognitive	  
processing.	  These	  organized	  patterns	  of	  intrinsic	  activity	  continuously	  adapt	  with	  
ongoing	  experiences	  to	  reflect	  past	  and	  anticipate	  future	  experiences.	  By	  this,	  the	  
intrinsic	  architecture	  of	  ongoing	  brain	  activity	  continuously	  adapts	  and	  prepares	  the	  
organism	  for	  what	  might	  happen.	  In	  conclusion,	  the	  intrinsic	  brain	  state	  might	  have	  
more	  impact	  on	  human	  behavior	  than	  does	  the	  brain's	  immediate	  response	  to	  an	  event.	  
	  

	  

	  

79	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

13 References	  
1.	  

Friston,	  K.	  J.	  Modalities,	  modes,	  and	  models	  in	  functional	  neuroimaging.	  Science	  326,	  399–
403	  (2009).	  

2.	  

Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  A	  brief	  history	  of	  human	  brain	  mapping.	  Trends	  Neurosci	  32,	  118–126	  
(2009).	  

3.	  

Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  &	  Mintun,	  M.	  A.	  Brain	  work	  and	  brain	  imaging.	  Annu	  Rev	  Neurosci	  29,	  449–
476	  (2006).	  

4.	  

Gusnard,	  D.	  A.,	  Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  &	  Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  Searching	  for	  a	  baseline:	  functional	  imaging	  
and	  the	  resting	  human	  brain.	  Nat	  Rev	  Neurosci	  2,	  685–694	  (2001).	  

5.	  

Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  Two	  views	  of	  brain	  function.	  Trends	  Cogn	  Sci	  (Regul	  Ed)	  14,	  180–190	  
(2010).	  

6.	  

Belliveau,	  J.	  W.	  et	  al.	  Functional	  mapping	  of	  the	  human	  visual	  cortex	  by	  magnetic	  
resonance	  imaging.	  Science	  254,	  716–719	  (1991).	  

7.	  

Friston,	  K.	  J.	  Imaging	  neuroscience:	  principles	  or	  maps?	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  95,	  796–
802	  (1998).	  

8.	  

Logothetis,	  N.	  K.	  What	  we	  can	  do	  and	  what	  we	  cannot	  do	  with	  fMRI.	  Nature	  453,	  869–878	  
(2008).	  

9.	  

Logothetis,	  N.	  K.,	  Pauls,	  J.,	  Augath,	  M.,	  Trinath,	  T.	  &	  Oeltermann,	  A.	  Neurophysiological	  
investigation	  of	  the	  basis	  of	  the	  fMRI	  signal.	  Nature	  412,	  150–157	  (2001).	  

10.	  

Ogawa,	  S.,	  Lee,	  T.	  M.,	  Nayak,	  A.	  S.	  &	  Glynn,	  P.	  Oxygenation-­‐sensitive	  contrast	  in	  magnetic	  
resonance	  image	  of	  rodent	  brain	  at	  high	  magnetic	  fields.	  Magn	  Reson	  Med	  14,	  68–78	  
(1990).	  

11.	  

Bandettini,	  P.,	  Wong,	  E.	  &	  Hinks,	  R.	  Time	  course	  EPI	  of	  human	  brain	  function	  during	  task	  
activation.	  Magnetic	  …	  (1992).	  

12.	  

Kwong,	  K.	  &	  Belliveau,	  J.	  Dynamic	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  of	  human	  brain	  activity	  
during	  primary	  sensory	  stimulation.	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  …	  (1992).	  

13.	  

Ogawa,	  S.,	  Tank,	  D.	  &	  Menon,	  R.	  Intrinsic	  signal	  changes	  accompanying	  sensory	  
stimulation:	  functional	  brain	  mapping	  with	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging.	  Proceedings	  of	  
the	  …	  (1992).	  

14.	  

Fox,	  M.	  D.	  &	  Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  Spontaneous	  fluctuations	  in	  brain	  activity	  observed	  with	  
functional	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging.	  Nat	  Rev	  Neurosci	  8,	  700–711	  (2007).	  

15.	  

Corbetta,	  M.,	  Patel,	  G.	  &	  Shulman,	  G.	  L.	  The	  reorienting	  system	  of	  the	  human	  brain:	  from	  
environment	  to	  theory	  of	  mind.	  Neuron	  58,	  306–324	  (2008).	  

16.	  

Shulman,	  R.	  G.,	  Rothman,	  D.	  L.,	  Behar,	  K.	  L.	  &	  Hyder,	  F.	  Energetic	  basis	  of	  brain	  activity:	  
implications	  for	  neuroimaging.	  Trends	  Neurosci	  27,	  489–495	  (2004).	  

17.	  

Fox,	  P.	  T.,	  Raichle,	  M.	  E.,	  Mintun,	  M.	  A.	  &	  Dence,	  C.	  Nonoxidative	  glucose	  consumption	  
during	  focal	  physiologic	  neural	  activity.	  Science	  241,	  462–464	  (1988).	  

18.	  

Cole,	  D.	  M.,	  Smith,	  S.	  M.	  &	  Beckmann,	  C.	  F.	  Advances	  and	  pitfalls	  in	  the	  analysis	  and	  
interpretation	  of	  resting-­‐state	  FMRI	  data.	  Front	  Syst	  Neurosci	  4,	  8	  (2010).	  

19.	  

Smith,	  S.	  M.	  et	  al.	  Network	  modelling	  methods	  for	  FMRI.	  NeuroImage	  54,	  875–891	  (2011).	  

20.	  

Friston,	  K.	  Functional	  and	  effective	  connectivity	  in	  neuroimaging:	  a	  synthesis.	  Hum	  Brain	  
Mapp	  2,	  56–78	  (1994).	  

21.	  

Yang,	  H.	  et	  al.	  Amplitude	  of	  low	  frequency	  fluctuation	  within	  visual	  areas	  revealed	  by	  
resting-­‐state	  functional	  MRI.	  NeuroImage	  36,	  144–152	  (2007).	  

	  

80	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

22.	  

Van	  Dijk,	  K.	  R.	  A.	  et	  al.	  Intrinsic	  functional	  connectivity	  as	  a	  tool	  for	  human	  connectomics:	  
theory,	  properties,	  and	  optimization.	  J	  Neurophysiol	  103,	  297–321	  (2010).	  

23.	  

Sporns,	  O.,	  Tononi,	  G.	  &	  Kötter,	  R.	  The	  human	  connectome:	  A	  structural	  description	  of	  the	  
human	  brain.	  PLoS	  Comput	  Biol	  1,	  e42	  (2005).	  

24.	  

Bressler,	  S.	  L.	  &	  Menon,	  V.	  Large-­‐scale	  brain	  networks	  in	  cognition:	  emerging	  methods	  
and	  principles.	  Trends	  Cogn	  Sci	  (Regul	  Ed)	  14,	  277–290	  (2010).	  

25.	  

Biswal,	  B.,	  Yetkin,	  F.	  Z.,	  Haughton,	  V.	  M.	  &	  Hyde,	  J.	  S.	  Functional	  connectivity	  in	  the	  motor	  
cortex	  of	  resting	  human	  brain	  using	  echo-­‐planar	  MRI.	  Magn	  Reson	  Med	  34,	  537–541	  
(1995).	  

26.	  

Greicius,	  M.	  D.,	  Krasnow,	  B.,	  Reiss,	  A.	  L.	  &	  Menon,	  V.	  Functional	  connectivity	  in	  the	  resting	  
brain:	  a	  network	  analysis	  of	  the	  default	  mode	  hypothesis.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  100,	  
253–258	  (2003).	  

27.	  

Fox,	  M.	  D.	  et	  al.	  The	  human	  brain	  is	  intrinsically	  organized	  into	  dynamic,	  anticorrelated	  
functional	  networks.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  102,	  9673–9678	  (2005).	  

28.	  

Beckmann,	  C.	  F.,	  DeLuca,	  M.,	  Devlin,	  J.	  T.	  &	  Smith,	  S.	  M.	  Investigations	  into	  resting-­‐state	  
connectivity	  using	  independent	  component	  analysis.	  Philos	  Trans	  R	  Soc	  Lond,	  B,	  Biol	  Sci	  
360,	  1001–1013	  (2005).	  

29.	  

De	  Luca,	  M.,	  Beckmann,	  C.	  F.,	  De	  Stefano,	  N.,	  Matthews,	  P.	  M.	  &	  Smith,	  S.	  M.	  fMRI	  resting	  
state	  networks	  define	  distinct	  modes	  of	  long-­‐distance	  interactions	  in	  the	  human	  brain.	  
NeuroImage	  29,	  1359–1367	  (2006).	  

30.	  

Damoiseaux,	  J.	  S.	  et	  al.	  Consistent	  resting-­‐state	  networks	  across	  healthy	  subjects.	  Proc	  
Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  103,	  13848–13853	  (2006).	  

31.	  

Yeo,	  B.	  T.	  T.	  et	  al.	  The	  organization	  of	  the	  human	  cerebral	  cortex	  estimated	  by	  intrinsic	  
functional	  connectivity.	  J	  Neurophysiol	  106,	  1125–1165	  (2011).	  

32.	  

Allen,	  E.	  A.	  et	  al.	  A	  baseline	  for	  the	  multivariate	  comparison	  of	  resting-­‐state	  networks.	  
Front	  Syst	  Neurosci	  5,	  2	  (2011).	  

33.	  

Doucet,	  G.	  et	  al.	  Brain	  activity	  at	  rest:	  A	  multi-­‐scale	  hierarchical	  functional	  organization.	  J	  
Neurophysiol	  (2011).doi:10.1152/jn.00895.2010	  

34.	  

Abou-­‐Elseoud,	  A.	  et	  al.	  Group-­‐ICA	  Model	  Order	  Highlights	  Patterns	  of	  Functional	  Brain	  
Connectivity.	  Front	  Syst	  Neurosci	  5,	  37	  (2011).	  

35.	  

Lu,	  Zuo,	  Gu	  &	  Waltz	  Synchronized	  delta	  oscillations	  correlate	  with	  the	  resting-­‐state	  
functional	  MRI	  signal.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  104,	  18265–18269	  (2007).	  

36.	  

Vincent,	  J.	  L.	  et	  al.	  Intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  in	  the	  anaesthetized	  monkey	  brain.	  
Nature	  447,	  83–86	  (2007).	  

37.	  

Biswal,	  B.	  B.	  et	  al.	  Toward	  discovery	  science	  of	  human	  brain	  function.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  U	  
S	  A	  107,	  4734–4739	  (2010).	  

38.	  

Kelly,	  A.	  M.	  C.	  et	  al.	  Development	  of	  anterior	  cingulate	  functional	  connectivity	  from	  late	  
childhood	  to	  early	  adulthood.	  Cereb	  Cortex	  19,	  640–657	  (2009).	  

39.	  

Supekar,	  K.	  et	  al.	  Development	  of	  functional	  and	  structural	  connectivity	  within	  the	  default	  
mode	  network	  in	  young	  children.	  NeuroImage	  52,	  290–301	  (2010).	  

40.	  

Fair,	  D.	  A.	  et	  al.	  Functional	  brain	  networks	  develop	  from	  a	  “local	  to	  distributed”	  
organization.	  PLoS	  Comput	  Biol	  5,	  e1000381	  (2009).	  

41.	  

Andrews-­‐Hanna,	  J.	  R.	  et	  al.	  Disruption	  of	  large-­‐scale	  brain	  systems	  in	  advanced	  aging.	  
Neuron	  56,	  924–935	  (2007).	  

42.	  

Fukunaga,	  M.	  et	  al.	  Large-­‐amplitude,	  spatially	  correlated	  fluctuations	  in	  BOLD	  fMRI	  
signals	  during	  extended	  rest	  and	  early	  sleep	  stages.	  Magn	  Reson	  Imaging	  24,	  979–992	  

	  

81	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

(2006).	  
43.	  

Larson-­‐Prior,	  L.	  J.	  et	  al.	  Cortical	  network	  functional	  connectivity	  in	  the	  descent	  to	  sleep.	  
Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  106,	  4489–4494	  (2009).	  

44.	  

Greicius,	  M.	  D.	  et	  al.	  Persistent	  default-­‐mode	  network	  connectivity	  during	  light	  sedation.	  
Hum	  Brain	  Mapp	  29,	  839–847	  (2008).	  

45.	  

Boveroux,	  P.	  et	  al.	  Breakdown	  of	  within-­‐	  and	  between-­‐network	  resting	  state	  functional	  
magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  connectivity	  during	  propofol-­‐induced	  loss	  of	  consciousness.	  
Anesthesiology	  113,	  1038–1053	  (2010).	  

46.	  

Achard,	  S.	  &	  Bullmore,	  E.	  Efficiency	  and	  cost	  of	  economical	  brain	  functional	  networks.	  
PLoS	  Comput	  Biol	  3,	  e17	  (2007).	  

47.	  

Kelly,	  C.	  et	  al.	  L-­‐dopa	  modulates	  functional	  connectivity	  in	  striatal	  cognitive	  and	  motor	  
networks:	  a	  double-­‐blind	  placebo-­‐controlled	  study.	  J	  Neurosci	  29,	  7364–7378	  (2009).	  

48.	  

Hagmann,	  P.	  et	  al.	  Mapping	  the	  structural	  core	  of	  human	  cerebral	  cortex.	  PLoS	  Biol	  6,	  
e159	  (2008).	  

49.	  

Honey,	  C.	  J.	  et	  al.	  Predicting	  human	  resting-­‐state	  functional	  connectivity	  from	  structural	  
connectivity.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  106,	  2035–2040	  (2009).	  

50.	  

Leopold,	  D.	  A.	  &	  Maier,	  A.	  Ongoing	  physiological	  processes	  in	  the	  cerebral	  cortex.	  
NeuroImage	  (2011).doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.059	  

51.	  

Niazy,	  R.	  K.,	  Xie,	  J.,	  Miller,	  K.,	  Beckmann,	  C.	  F.	  &	  Smith,	  S.	  M.	  Spectral	  characteristics	  of	  
resting	  state	  networks.	  Prog	  Brain	  Res	  193,	  259–276	  (2011).	  

52.	  

Shmuel,	  A.	  &	  Leopold,	  D.	  Neuronal	  correlates	  of	  spontaneous	  fluctuations	  in	  fMRI	  signals	  
in	  monkey	  visual	  cortex:	  Implications	  for	  functional	  connectivity	  at	  rest.	  Hum	  Brain	  Mapp	  
29,	  751–761	  (2008).	  

53.	  

He,	  B.,	  Snyder,	  A.,	  Zempel,	  J.,	  Smyth,	  M.	  &	  Raichle,	  M.	  Electrophysiological	  correlates	  of	  the	  
brain's	  intrinsic	  large-­‐scale	  functional	  architecture.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  
(2008).doi:10.1073/pnas.0807010105	  

54.	  

Nir,	  Y.	  et	  al.	  Interhemispheric	  correlations	  of	  slow	  spontaneous	  neuronal	  fluctuations	  
revealed	  in	  human	  sensory	  cortex.	  Nat	  Neurosci	  (2008).doi:10.1038/nn.2177	  

55.	  

Keller,	  C.	  J.	  et	  al.	  Intrinsic	  functional	  architecture	  predicts	  electrically	  evoked	  responses	  in	  
the	  human	  brain.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  U	  S	  A	  108,	  10308–10313	  (2011).	  

56.	  

Laufs,	  H.	  et	  al.	  Electroencephalographic	  signatures	  of	  attentional	  and	  cognitive	  default	  
modes	  in	  spontaneous	  brain	  activity	  fluctuations	  at	  rest.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  100,	  
11053–11058	  (2003).	  

57.	  

Albert,	  N.,	  Robertson,	  E.	  &	  Miall,	  R.	  The	  Resting	  Human	  Brain	  and	  Motor	  Learning.	  Curr	  
Biol	  (2009).doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.028	  

58.	  

Lee,	  A.	  K.	  &	  Wilson,	  M.	  A.	  Memory	  of	  sequential	  experience	  in	  the	  hippocampus	  during	  
slow	  wave	  sleep.	  Neuron	  36,	  1183–1194	  (2002).	  

59.	  

Riedl,	  V.	  et	  al.	  Repeated	  pain	  induces	  adaptations	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  to	  reflect	  past	  
and	  predict	  future	  pain.	  NeuroImage	  57,	  206–213	  (2011).	  

60.	  

Lewis,	  C.,	  Baldassarre,	  A.,	  Committeri,	  G.,	  Romani,	  G.	  &	  Corbetta,	  M.	  Learning	  sculpts	  the	  
spontaneous	  activity	  of	  the	  resting	  human	  brain.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  
(2009).doi:10.1073/pnas.0902455106	  

61.	  

Seeley,	  W.	  W.	  et	  al.	  Dissociable	  Intrinsic	  Connectivity	  Networks	  for	  Salience	  Processing	  
and	  Executive	  Control.	  Journal	  of	  Neuroscience	  27,	  2349–2356	  (2007).	  

62.	  

Harrison,	  B.	  J.	  et	  al.	  Modulation	  of	  brain	  resting-­‐state	  networks	  by	  sad	  mood	  induction.	  
PLoS	  ONE	  3,	  e1794	  (2008).	  

	  

82	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

63.	  

Sorg,	  C.	  et	  al.	  Selective	  changes	  of	  resting-­‐state	  networks	  in	  individuals	  at	  risk	  for	  
Alzheimer's	  disease.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  U	  S	  A	  104,	  18760–18765	  (2007).	  

64.	  

Sorg,	  C.	  et	  al.	  Increased	  Intrinsic	  Brain	  Activity	  in	  the	  Striatum	  Reflects	  Symptom	  
Dimensions	  in	  Schizophrenia.	  Schizophrenia	  bulletin	  (2012).doi:10.1093/schbul/sbr184	  

65.	  

Boly,	  M.	  et	  al.	  Functional	  connectivity	  in	  the	  default	  network	  during	  resting	  state	  is	  
preserved	  in	  a	  vegetative	  but	  not	  in	  a	  brain	  dead	  patient.	  Hum	  Brain	  Mapp	  
(2009).doi:10.1002/hbm.20672	  

66.	  

Meindl,	  T.	  et	  al.	  Test-­‐retest	  reproducibility	  of	  the	  default-­‐mode	  network	  in	  healthy	  
individuals.	  Hum	  Brain	  Mapp	  (2009).doi:10.1002/hbm.20860	  

67.	  

Shehzad,	  Z.	  et	  al.	  The	  Resting	  Brain:	  Unconstrained	  yet	  Reliable.	  Cereb	  Cortex	  
(2009).doi:10.1093/cercor/bhn256	  

68.	  

Zuo,	  X.-­‐N.	  et	  al.	  Reliable	  intrinsic	  connectivity	  networks:	  test-­‐retest	  evaluation	  using	  ICA	  
and	  dual	  regression	  approach.	  NeuroImage	  49,	  2163–2177	  (2010).	  

69.	  

Ploghaus,	  A.,	  Becerra,	  L.,	  Borras,	  C.	  &	  Borsook,	  D.	  Neural	  circuitry	  underlying	  pain	  
modulation:	  expectation,	  hypnosis,	  placebo.	  Trends	  Cogn	  Sci	  (Regul	  Ed)	  7,	  197–200	  
(2003).	  

70.	  

Apkarian,	  A.	  V.,	  Bushnell,	  M.	  C.,	  Treede,	  R.-­‐D.	  &	  Zubieta,	  J.-­‐K.	  Human	  brain	  mechanisms	  of	  
pain	  perception	  and	  regulation	  in	  health	  and	  disease.	  European	  journal	  of	  pain	  (London,	  
England)	  9,	  463–484	  (2005).	  

71.	  

Bingel,	  U.,	  Schoell,	  E.,	  Herken,	  W.,	  Büchel,	  C.	  &	  May,	  A.	  Habituation	  to	  painful	  stimulation	  
involves	  the	  antinociceptive	  system.	  Pain	  131,	  21–30	  (2007).	  

72.	  

Apkarian,	  A.,	  Baliki,	  M.	  &	  Geha,	  P.	  Towards	  a	  theory	  of	  chronic	  pain.	  Prog	  Neurobiol	  87,	  
81–97	  (2009).	  

73.	  

Gündel,	  H.	  et	  al.	  Altered	  cerebral	  response	  to	  noxious	  heat	  stimulation	  in	  patients	  with	  
somatoform	  pain	  disorder.	  Pain	  (2007).doi:10.1016/j.pain.2007.10.003	  

74.	  

Tambini,	  A.,	  Ketz,	  N.	  &	  Davachi,	  L.	  Enhanced	  brain	  correlations	  during	  rest	  are	  related	  to	  
memory	  for	  recent	  experiences.	  Neuron	  65,	  280–290	  (2010).	  

75.	  

van	  Kesteren,	  M.	  T.	  R.,	  Fernández,	  G.,	  Norris,	  D.	  G.	  &	  Hermans,	  E.	  J.	  Persistent	  schema-­‐
dependent	  hippocampal-­‐neocortical	  connectivity	  during	  memory	  encoding	  and	  
postencoding	  rest	  in	  humans.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  107,	  7550–7555	  (2010).	  

76.	  

Grossenbacher,	  P.	  G.	  &	  Lovelace,	  C.	  T.	  Mechanisms	  of	  synesthesia:	  cognitive	  and	  
physiological	  constraints.	  Trends	  Cogn	  Sci	  (Regul	  Ed)	  5,	  36–41	  (2001).	  

77.	  

Rouw,	  R.	  &	  Scholte,	  H.	  S.	  Increased	  structural	  connectivity	  in	  grapheme-­‐color	  synesthesia.	  
Nat	  Neurosci	  10,	  792–797	  (2007).	  

78.	  

Hänggi,	  J.,	  Wotruba,	  D.	  &	  Jäncke,	  L.	  Globally	  altered	  structural	  brain	  network	  topology	  in	  
grapheme-­‐color	  synesthesia.	  J	  Neurosci	  31,	  5816–5828	  (2011).	  

79.	  

Hampson,	  M.,	  Driesen,	  N.	  R.,	  Skudlarski,	  P.,	  Gore,	  J.	  C.	  &	  Constable,	  R.	  T.	  Brain	  connectivity	  
related	  to	  working	  memory	  performance.	  J	  Neurosci	  26,	  13338–13343	  (2006).	  

80.	  

Adelstein,	  J.	  S.	  et	  al.	  Personality	  is	  reflected	  in	  the	  brain's	  intrinsic	  functional	  architecture.	  
PLoS	  ONE	  6,	  e27633	  (2011).	  

81.	  

Doria,	  V.	  et	  al.	  Emergence	  of	  resting	  state	  networks	  in	  the	  preterm	  human	  brain.	  Proc	  Natl	  
Acad	  Sci	  USA	  107,	  20015–20020	  (2010).	  

82.	  

Fransson,	  P.	  et	  al.	  Resting-­‐state	  networks	  in	  the	  infant	  brain.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  104,	  
15531–15536	  (2007).	  

83.	  

Fair,	  D.	  A.	  et	  al.	  Maturing	  thalamocortical	  functional	  connectivity	  across	  development.	  
Front	  Syst	  Neurosci	  4,	  10	  (2010).	  

	  

83	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

84.	  

Zhang,	  D.	  &	  Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  Disease	  and	  the	  brain's	  dark	  energy.	  Nat	  Rev	  Neurol	  6,	  15–28	  
(2010).	  

85.	  

Greicius,	  M.	  Resting-­‐state	  functional	  connectivity	  in	  neuropsychiatric	  disorders.	  Curr	  Opin	  
Neurol	  21,	  424–430	  (2008).	  

86.	  

Delbeuck,	  X.,	  Van	  der	  Linden,	  M.	  &	  Collette,	  F.	  Alzheimer's	  disease	  as	  a	  disconnection	  
syndrome?	  Neuropsychology	  review	  13,	  79–92	  (2003).	  

87.	  

Greicius,	  M.	  D.,	  Srivastava,	  G.,	  Reiss,	  A.	  L.	  &	  Menon,	  V.	  Default-­‐mode	  network	  activity	  
distinguishes	  Alzheimer's	  disease	  from	  healthy	  aging:	  evidence	  from	  functional	  MRI.	  Proc	  
Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  USA	  101,	  4637–4642	  (2004).	  

88.	  

Wang,	  K.	  et	  al.	  Altered	  functional	  connectivity	  in	  early	  Alzheimer's	  disease:	  A	  resting-­‐state	  
fMRI	  study.	  Hum	  Brain	  Mapp	  28,	  967–978	  (2007).	  

89.	  

He,	  Y.,	  Chen,	  Z.	  &	  Evans,	  A.	  Structural	  insights	  into	  aberrant	  topological	  patterns	  of	  large-­‐
scale	  cortical	  networks	  in	  Alzheimer's	  disease.	  J	  Neurosci	  28,	  4756–4766	  (2008).	  

90.	  

Wang,	  Z.	  et	  al.	  Spatial	  patterns	  of	  intrinsic	  brain	  activity	  in	  mild	  cognitive	  impairment	  and	  
alzheimer's	  disease:	  A	  resting-­‐state	  functional	  MRI	  study.	  Hum	  Brain	  Mapp	  
(2010).doi:10.1002/hbm.21140	  

91.	  

He,	  Y.,	  Chen,	  Z.,	  Gong,	  G.	  &	  Evans,	  A.	  Neuronal	  Networks	  in	  Alzheimer's	  Disease.	  
Neuroscientist	  (2009).doi:10.1177/1073858409334423	  

92.	  

Kegeles,	  L.	  S.	  et	  al.	  Increased	  synaptic	  dopamine	  function	  in	  associative	  regions	  of	  the	  
striatum	  in	  schizophrenia.	  Arch	  Gen	  Psychiatry	  67,	  231–239	  (2010).	  

93.	  

Garrity,	  A.	  G.	  et	  al.	  Aberrant	  “default	  mode”	  functional	  connectivity	  in	  schizophrenia.	  Am	  J	  
Psychiatry	  164,	  450–457	  (2007).	  

94.	  

Bluhm,	  R.	  L.	  et	  al.	  Spontaneous	  low-­‐frequency	  fluctuations	  in	  the	  BOLD	  signal	  in	  
schizophrenic	  patients:	  anomalies	  in	  the	  default	  network.	  Schizophrenia	  bulletin	  33,	  
1004–1012	  (2007).	  

95.	  

Lynall,	  M.-­‐E.	  et	  al.	  Functional	  connectivity	  and	  brain	  networks	  in	  schizophrenia.	  J	  Neurosci	  
30,	  9477–9487	  (2010).	  

96.	  

Liu,	  Y.	  et	  al.	  Disrupted	  small-­‐world	  networks	  in	  schizophrenia.	  Brain	  
(2008).doi:10.1093/brain/awn018	  

97.	  

Fox,	  M.	  D.,	  Snyder,	  A.	  Z.,	  Vincent,	  J.	  L.	  &	  Raichle,	  M.	  E.	  Intrinsic	  fluctuations	  within	  cortical	  
systems	  account	  for	  intertrial	  variability	  in	  human	  behavior.	  Neuron	  56,	  171–184	  (2007).	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

84	  

INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Valentin Riedl, 2012

14 Acknowledgments	  
I	  am	  deeply	  grateful	  for	  the	  love	  and	  support	  of	  Kathrin	  and	  my	  parents	  and	  I	  have	  been	  
enjoying	  the	  hours	  of	  discussions	  and	  exchange	  on	  brain	  and	  other	  matters	  with	  Afra	  
and	  Christian.	  
	  
15 Statutory	  declaration	  and	  statement	  
Ich versichere hiermit eidesstattlich, dass die vorgelegte Dissertation von mir selbständig und
	  

nur unter Verwendung der angegebenen Hilfsmittel angefertigt wurde.	  

	  

85	  

