INAUGURAL CONFERENCE

Brain abnormalities in attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder: a review
Katya Rubia, Analucía A. Alegría, Helen Brinson

Aim. To review the magnetic resonance imaging findings in child and adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Development. Studies have shown that ADHD is characterised by multiple functional and structural neural network
abnormalities including most prominently fronto-striatal, but also fronto-parieto-temporal, fronto-cerebellar and even
fronto-limbic networks. Evidence from longitudinal structural imaging studies has shown that ADHD is characterised by a
delay in structural brain maturation. This is reinforced by indirect evidence from cross-sectional imaging studies for more
immature brain function as well as structural and functional connectivity patterns, which, however, needs corroboration
by longitudinal studies. Dysfunction of the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex seems to be more pronounced in ADHD relative
to other pediatric disorders and there is some evidence for differential abnormalities in the basal ganglia. A meta-analysis
of stimulant effects on brain function shows that the most consistent mechanism of action of acute psychostimulant
medication is the increased activation of the inferior prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia. First attempts to use
neuroimaging data to make individual diagnostic classifications of ADHD children based on pattern recognition techniques
are promising but need replication across centres and scanners.
Conclusions. The last two decades of neuroimaging have shaped out biomarkers of ADHD. Future studies will need to
focus on using this information for clinical translation such as using neuroimaging for individual diagnostic and prognostic
classification or by using neuroimaging as a neurotherapy to reverse those brain function abnormalities that have been
established over the last two decades of neuroimaging.
Key words. Atomoxetine. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Methylphenidate. Psychostimulants.

Introduction
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is
characterised by symptoms of age-inappropriate inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity [1]. ADHD
is one of the most common childhood psychiatric
disorders, affecting 3-8% of school-aged children,
with 65% of cases persisting into adulthood [2].
ADHD patients have deficits in higher-level cognitive functions necessary for goal-directed behaviors,
so-called ‘executive functions’ (EF), that are known
to be mediated by late developing fronto-striato-parietal and fronto-cerebellar networks [3]. The most
consistent deficits are in motor response inhibition,
sustained attention, and working memory [4,5] as
well as timing processing, in particular time estimation [6,7] and temporal foresight, as measured in
temporal discounting and gambling tasks [7].

Objectives
ADHD is the most imaged child psychiatric disorder with over hundreds of published structural and

www.neurologia.com

Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

functional imaging studies. This review discusses
the most consistent deficit findings in brain structure, function and structural and functional connectivity. Furthermore, the review will cover current findings on disorder-specificity of these brain
deficits in ADHD relative to other child psychiatric
disorders. The effects of stimulant and non-stimulant medications on the brain structure and function of ADHD patients will also be reviewed and
discussed. Last, we will discuss clinical applications
of neuroimaging. This includes the use of multivariate pattern recognition analyses for imaging-based
individual diagnostic classification of ADHD and
neurotherapy methods that aim to upregulate dysfunctional brain regions in ADHD through neurofeedback or brain stimulation.

Department of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry. Institute of Psychiatry.
King’s College. London, United
Kingdom.
Corresponding author:
Prof. Katya Rubia. Department
of Child Psychiatry/SGDP, P046.
Institute of Psychiatry. 16 De
Crespigny Park. London, SE5 8AF,
United Kingdom.
Fax:
+44 207 8480866.
E-mail:
katya.rubia@kcl.ac.uk
Financial disclosure:
K.R. has received speaker’s
honoraria from Lilly and Shire.
Acknowledgements:
K.R. has received support from
the National Institute of Health
Research (NIHR) Biomedical
Research Centre (BRC) for Mental
Health at South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
and Institute of Psychiatry, Kings
College London. H.B. received
post-doctoral support from an
Action Medical Research grant to
K.R. A.A.A. was supported by an
Institute of Psychiatry PhD
excellence award.
Accepted:
10.01.14.
How to cite this paper:
Rubia K, Alegría AA, Brinson H.
Brain abnormalities in attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder:
a review. Rev Neurol 2014;
58 (Supl 1): S3-18.
Versión española disponible
en www.neurologia.com
© 2014 Revista de Neurología

Structural MRI studies
The vast majority of structural MRI (sMRI) studies
have used region of interest (ROI) analyses, focussing on apriori hypothesised regions, typically with
relatively liberally chosen thresholds. The most con-

S3

K. Rubia, et al

sistent findings of a meta-analysis of ROI studies
were reductions in total and right cerebral volumes,
including several prefrontal regions, in the posterior inferior cerebellar vermis, the splenium, the corpus callosum, and the right caudate [8], which were
also observed in later larger numbered sMRI studies [9-12]. A few recent ROI sMRI studies also
found grey matter (GM) or cortical thickness abnormalities in subcortical limbic regions such as
insula [13], amygdala [14] and thalamus [15]. These
ROI-based meta-analytic findings confirm the notion that ADHD patients have deficits in frontostriatal and fronto-cerebellar networks that mediate the late developing EF that are impaired in the
disorder [16]. ROI studies, however, are biased towards apriori hypothesised regions. Whole brain
imaging studies are more suitable to reveal the most
consistent brain abnormalities without unnecessarily restricting the search volume. Three meta-analyses have been published on the remarkably few
whole brain voxel-based morphometry (VBM)
sMRI studies of ADHD. All studies showed that the
right basal ganglia were consistently reduced in GM
in ADHD relative to healthy controls [17-19]. In
addition, the deficits were most pronounced in pediatric studies with adult studies not showing any
deficits [18,19]. Given the extensive connections
between the basal ganglia and frontal regions [16],
a primary deficit in the basal ganglia, however, still
implies fronto-striatal circuit abnormalities in
ADHD [16]. These meta-analytic findings tie in well
with our neurochemistry abnormality findings in
ADHD based on a meta-analysis of positron emission tomography (PET) studies where we showed
consistently reduced dopamine transporter levels
in the basal ganglia in medication-naïve ADHD patients [20]. The only enhanced GM volume in
ADHD patients relative to controls was in the precuneus, which is part of the default mode network
(DMN) [18]. The DMN consists of intercorrelated
co-activation of medial frontal lobe, anterior and
posterior cingulate (ACC/PCC) and inferior temporal and parietal areas during rest, that are parametrically attenuated during cognitive load, and thought
to represent ‘mental clutter’. ADHD patients have
more attentional lapses and attenuated deactivation
of the DMN during attention tasks [21-23]. The enlarged volume size in this region could therefore be
a plastic consequence of enhanced DMN activation
(i.e. diminished deactivation).
In conclusion, the most consistent abnormality
in ADHD patients based on whole-brain cross-sectional imaging studies is the reduced GM in the
basal ganglia, with additional evidence for abnor-

S4

mal GM and cortical thickness abnormalities in
frontal, temporal and cerebellar regions based on
ROI studies.
It has been argued that ADHD children suffer
from delayed brain maturation, due to their relative
immaturity in behavioural features that diminish
naturally with age such as impulsiveness and inattention and in cognitive functions that are mediated by late developing fronto-striatal and frontocerebellar systems [3]. Seminal longitudinal imaging studies from the National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH) provided direct evidence for this
hypothesis by showing that 232 ADHD patients
relative to 232 healthy controls had a delay in the
peak of cortical thickness and surface area by 2-5
years, with the most prominent delay in frontal, superior temporal and parietal regions [11,24].
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) studies show
that ADHD children and adults have deficits not
only in isolated brain regions but in the white matter (WM) connectivity between these regions, most
prominently between fronto-striatal, fronto-parietotemporal, and fronto-cerebellar connections [2530], as also shown in a recent meta-analysis of 9
DTI studies using whole brain analyses [31]. Furthermore these WM tract abnormalities, reflecting
poor myelination or reduced axonal branching,
have been related to clinical behavioural and cognitive abnormalities [30,32]. Consistent with the maturational delay hypothesis of ADHD, one study
found slower development of WM in the caudate
nucleus over adolescence in ADHD, which reached
normal levels by adulthood [33] while 2 other studies that tested for a range of WM tracts, found almost all WM tracts to be attenuated in ADHD, and,
given that most of these WM tracts develop well
into mid-adulthood [34], hypothesised a possible
global delay in WM tract development [35,36]. This
will, however, have to be corroborated in longitudinal DTI studies.

Functional MRI studies
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
studies have provided consistent evidence for fronto-striatal, fronto-parietal and fronto-cerebellar
deficits in ADHD during tasks of cognitive control
with some emerging evidence for fronto-limbic abnormalities in the context of reward processing.
A meta-analysis of 55 whole-brain fMRI studies
across EF, memory, reward and timing tasks in 16
adult and 39 pediatric studies, including a total of
741 ADHD and 801 control subjects, showed sig-

www.neurologia.com Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

Inaugural Conference

Figure 1. Four meta-analyses of fMRI studies of ADHD patients for different cognitive domains. The meta-analyses show underactivation in ADHD
patients in several dissociated fronto-striatal and fronto-cerebellar networks during the respective cognitive domains. a) During motor response
inhibition, ADHD patients show underactivation relative to healthy controls in the right ventral inhibition network, in right IFC, SMA, the basal
ganglia and thalamus. They had enhanced activation in posterior cingulate gyrus [38]. b) During interference inhibition, ADHD patients had
underactivation in right IFC, ACC, the basal ganglia and thalamus and enhanced activation in ventral anterior cingulate [38]. c) During attention
tasks, ADHD patients showed reduced activation relative to healthy controls in the right dorsal attention network, comprising right DLPFC, the posterior part of the basal ganglia and thalamus, inferior parietal lobe and precuneus. ADHD patients have enhanced activation relative to controls
in cerebellar and occipital regions [38]. d) During timing tasks, ADHD children had reduced activation in a predominantly left hemispheric timing
network, comprising left IFC, left inferior parietal lobe and right cerebellum. ADHD patients had enhanced activation in a default mode region, the
posterior cingulate cortex [22]. The enhanced activation in anterior and posterior cingulate could also reflect decreased activation of the default
mode network in ADHD versus healthy controls.

nificant hypoactivation in ADHD relative to controls in bilateral ventral attention networks –inferior frontal cortex (IFC), basal ganglia– and predominantly right hemispheric fronto-temporo-parietal
networks, including DLPFC/IFC, basal ganglia,
thalamus, ACC and SMA. In addition, hyperactivation was observed predominantly in default mode
regions as well as in visual and somatomotor regions [37]. Three other meta-analyses focused on
specific cognitive domains. Thus, a meta-analysis of
21 whole-brain fMRI studies of cognitive and motor inhibition, including 7 adult and 14 pediatric
studies, showed that 287 ADHD patients relative to
320 healthy controls had consistently reduced activation in key regions of inhibition, in right inferior

www.neurologia.com

Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

prefrontal cortex (IFC), supplementary motor area
(SMA), ACC, left striatum and right thalamus [38].
When separated by motor response and interference inhibition tasks, the SMA was more prominently underactivated for motor response inhibition and the ACC for interference inhibition (Figs.
1a, 1b). A meta-analysis on attention tasks included
13 mostly pediatric whole-brain fMRI studies and
found underactivation in 171 ADHD patients relative to 178 healthy controls in the right hemispheric
dorsal attention network, comprising the right
DLPFC, right inferior parietal cortex and caudal
parts of the basal ganglia and thalamus. In addition,
ADHD patients had increased activation relative to
controls in right cerebellum and left cuneus, pre-

S5

K. Rubia, et al

sumably compensating for the underactivation of
the frontal part of the dorsal DLPFC-parieto-cerebellar attention network [38] (Fig. 1c). A meta-analysis of timing functions in ADHD, including 11
fMRI studies showed consistently reduced activation in 150 ADHD patients relative to 145 healthy
controls in left IFC, left inferior parietal lobe and
the right lateral cerebellum [22], all key regions of
timing functions [39]. The timing meta-analysis in
addition also showed increased activation in ADHD
patients in default mode regions, the PCC and precuneus [22] (Fig. 1d).
Interestingly, the brain regions that are underactivated in ADHD increase progressively in their activation with age [3], which could potentially reflect
a developmental delay in brain function in ADHD
patients. Problems deactivating the DMN have been
associated with more attention lapses, both in normal development and in ADHD [23], and could also
reflect a developmental delay [3]. Both the problematic deactivation of the DMN concomitant with
poor activation of task-relevant and age-correlated
brain activation may hence reflect a developmental
delay of brain function and both are likely underlying the poor performance in ADHD patients in attention-demanding higher-level cognitive tasks.
In summary, the meta-analyses of whole-brain
fMRI studies in ADHD show that ADHD patients
have cognitive-domain dissociated deficits in multiple dorsal and ventral fronto-striato-parietal and
fronto-cerebellar networks, including IFC-ACC/
SMA-striato-thalamic networks for inhibitory control functions, right DLPFC-parieto-striato-cerebellar networks for attention functions and left IFCparieto-cerebellar networks for timing functions
[22,37,38] (Fig. 1). In addition, poor task-related activation appears to be concomitant with poor deactivation of the DMN, both of which are likely to underlie compromised performance in ADHD.
Abnormalities, however, have also been observed during reward processing. A meta-analysis
of 8 ROI fMRI studies of reward anticipation in 340
ADHD patients and healthy controls, most of which
used the same monetary reward anticipation task
(MID), showed consistent underactivation of the
ventral striatum in ADHD adults and children relative to healthy controls with a medium effect size
[40]. An important caveat, however, is that deficits
in ventral striatum have only been observed in ROI
studies. Future large-scale fMRI studies will have to
confirm the presence of abnormalities in the ventral striatum using whole brain image analyses.
In addition to deficits in the function of specific
frontal, striatal, temporo-parietal and cerebellar re-

S6

gions, functional connectivity studies have demonstrated that ADHD patients also have abnormalities
in the functional inter-regional connectivity between these regions both during rest and during
cognitive tasks [41]. Thus, during the resting state,
ADHD children have reduced functional connectivity in the DMN, mostly between ACC and PCC
[42-45], as well as in fronto-striato-thalamic, fronto-temporal and sensorimotor circuitries [46-49].
An interesting double dissociation was observed
between attenuated OFC-ventral striatum-limbic
functional connectivity and emotion dysregulation
and DLPFC-striato-cingulo-parietal functional
connectivity abnormalities and poor EF [50]. Reduced functional connectivity has also been observed in children and adults with ADHD within
fronto-striato-cerebellar networks during cognitive
tasks such as sustained attention [51], inhibition,
time estimation [52-54], working memory [55,56]
and response preparation [57]. Furthermore, there
is evidence for stronger coherence of the DLPFC
with DMN and reduced anti-correlation between
both in relation to poor attention performance,
suggesting a more diffuse connectivity between
functional networks in ADHD, where both DMN
intrudes during attention-demanding contexts and
DLPFC signalling is insufficiently suppressed in relation to DMN activity [21,58]. The findings from
these functional connectivity studies suggest both
abnormal task-based cortico-striatal-thalamic and
abnormal DMN functional ‘networks’ that are
poorly anti-correlated and together contribute to
the cognitive and behavioural symptoms of ADHD.
Given that DMN as well as task-based functional
connectivity mature progressively with increasing
age and are associated with progressive cognitive
maturation [3,59], the more immature functional
connectivity in these networks may reflect delayed
functional brain maturation. This hypothesis was
supported by a multivariate pattern recognition
study that showed that the resting state functional
connectivity abnormalities that classified ADHD
adults relative to controls was similar to the pattern
observed in younger typically developing subjects
[60]. Future longitudinal fMRI studies will need to
corroborate this hypothesis of a delay in the maturation of brain function and associated networks.

Effects of stimulant and non-stimulant
medications on the ADHD brain
Stimulant medication (e.g. methylphenidate or dexamphetamines) are first line treatment for ADHD

www.neurologia.com Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

Inaugural Conference

Figure 2. Most consistently increased brain activation within ADHD adolescents after a single clinical dose of psychostimulant medication relative
to placebo or off-medication. The most consistent activation increase was in right inferior prefrontal cortex (p < 0.005) followed by increased
activation in ventral ACC and the putamen (p < 0.05). There was a significant decrease of activation with placebo in dorsal ACC and supplementary
motor area relative to stimulant medication, which could also potentially reflect increased deactivation of these regions for medication relative to
placebo [65].

as they reduce the severity of ADHD core symptoms in up to 70% of patients [61]. Several fMRI
studies have sought to further our understanding
on the acute and chronic effects of stimulant medications on the function of the ADHD brain.
Several well-designed (e.g. randomised placebocontrolled, case-control crossover) whole-brain
and ROI fMRI studies have examined the acute effects of Methylphenidate on brain function during
a series of cognitive tasks in medication-naïve
ADHD patients. An acute dose of methylphenidate
in medication-naïve or in chronically medicated
ADHD youth has been shown to increase and normalise the underactivation in right and/or left IFC
as well as ACC during motor and interference inhibition [62-66], timing [6,65,67], error processing
[64] and sustained attention [51], but had no effect
during working memory [68,69]. Effects were also
observed in the cerebellum during time discrimination [6], interference and motor inhibition [6466] and attention tasks [51]; and in the striatum
during reward [51] and response inhibition tasks
[64-66,70].
Our meta-analysis of all 14 published wholebrain fMRI studies that tested the effects of stimulants on brain function in ADHD showed that the
most consistent acute effect is the increased activation of right IFC/insula, with additional effects in
the putamen at a more lenient threshold [65] (Fig.
2). A few studies investigated the acute effects of
stimulants on functional connectivity and found
that an acute dose of methylphenidate normalized
functional connectivity deficits in fronto-striatal,
fronto-parietal and fronto-cerebellar networks during vigilant attention [51], in fronto-parietal networks during working memory [55], in ventral ACC
and lateral PFC connectivity during a cognitive

www.neurologia.com

Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

Stroop task [54] and between the amygdala and lateral PFC [71] during an emotional Stroop task.
Relatively little, however, is known about chronic
effects of psychostimulants. A 12 months trial of
stimulant administration in children with ADHD
normalized the enhanced (potentially compensatory) activation in insula and putamen during a reorienting attention process. Also, there was a trend for
ACC dysfunction to be more pronounced in 5 unmedicated relative to 9 chronically medicated patients, suggesting long-term amelioration [72]. OROS
methylphenidate over 3 months normalized reduced ventral striatum and thalamus activation
during the processing of low but not high reward
outcomes [73]. In adult ADHD, a 6-week trial of
stimulant medication compared to placebo increased activation in the dorsal ACC, DLPFC, premotor and parietal cortices, caudate, thalamus and
cerebellum during interference inhibition [74]. Our
meta-regression analyses across fMRI studies of attention and inhibition found that long-term stimulant administration (between 6 months to 3 years)
was associated with normalization of right caudate
activity during attention [38] and of right DLPFC
activity during timing tasks [22].
In conclusion, the meta-analytic findings suggest
that acute and longer-term stimulant medication
treatment is most consistently associated with an
upregulation of two key dysfunctional areas in
ADHD, the right IFC and the basal ganglia.
Unfortunately there are no prospective longitudinal imaging studies of long-term stimulant effects
on brain structure. However, retrospective comparisons of medicated and non-medicated ADHD patients suggest that medicated patients with ADHD
have more normal size, volumes and/or morphology than unmedicated patients in ADHD-relevant

S7

K. Rubia, et al

brain regions including the right ACC [75]; the anterior thalamic pulvinar [15]; the posterior inferior
vermis of the cerebellum [76]; the left lateral cerebellar surface [77]; the basal ganglia [78]; and the
corpus callosum [79]. Two studies of retrospective
comparisons within longitudinal data found more
normal WM [80], and a less rapid cortical thinning
development in left IFG, premotor and parietal regions in long-term medicated relative to non-medicated children [81]. However, there have also been
negative findings in relatively small sampled studies
[9,82]. Two meta-regression analyses of VBM studies tested for long-term medication effects. Both
studies found that long-term stimulant medication
was associated with more normal basal ganglia volumes in ADHD [18,19].
In conclusion, overall sMRI and fMRI studies
suggest that stimulant medication may potentially
be neuro-protective on brain structure and function. Studies that have tested for neurochemical effects, however, have been less promising. Our meta-analysis of PET studies in mostly adult ADHD
patients, showed that long-term stimulant medication was associated with an abnormally increased
level of striatal dopamine transporters, which were
reduced relative to healthy controls in medicationnaïve patients, suggesting potential brain adaptation to stimulants [20]. This was also observed in 10
adults with ADHD in a within-subject study design
after a one year follow-up of chronic stimulant
medication treatment [83]. These findings of plastic
long-term upregulation of DAT with chronic stimulant medication could explain relatively poor longterm efficacy of stimulant medication [84]. However, prospective longitudinal imaging studies within
a randomized placebo-controlled design are crucial
to confirm these findings of plastic effects based on
cross-sectional comparisons on brain structure,
function and neurochemistry.
Very few studies have tested brain effects of the
only other licensed medication for ADHD, atomoxetine. In a placebo-controlled randomized study,
we found shared effects of atomoxetine and methylphenidate of upregulation of right IFC activation
during time discrimination and of bilateral IFC activation during inhibition, which was furthermore
normalised with both drugs in their underactivation in ADHD patients under placebo relative to
healthy controls [62,67]. Both drugs also elicited
compensatory fronto-striato-thalamic overactivation in ADHD children during working memory
and both drugs deactivated DMN activation [68].
Drug-specific effects, however, were also observed
with atomoxetine upregulating and normalised

S8

right DLPFC underactivation during working memory [68] and Methylphenidate increasing compensatory activation in left IFC and the basal ganglia
during response execution and one of the WM conditions [68]. Furthermore, methylphenidate had
drug-specific effects on the activation of the dopaminergically innervated SMA during motor response execution and time discrimination [62, 67].
A few recent fMRI studies tested chronic effects of
atomoxetine. The only pilot study in adult ADHD
showed that atomoxetine treatment of 6 weeks increased activation in ROIs of DLPFC, parietal cortex and cerebellum but not in dorsal ACC [85]. A
comparative fMRI study using a parallel group design in 36 ADHD patients found that a shared association between clinical improvement after 6-8
weeks of both drugs and reductions in bilateral primary motor cortex activation. There was, however,
also a drug-dissociated association in right IFG, left
ACC/SMA and bilateral PCC cortex which were all
enhanced in activation in relation to clinical response to atomoxetine but decreased in activation
in relation to clinical response to methylphenidate
[86]. Last, a preliminary analysis found that chronic
methylphenidate response in 7 ADHD adolescents
was associated with acute stimulant reduction effects in parietal regional homogeneity during rest
[87]. Future larger powered imaging studies using
multivariate pattern recognition methodology are
needed, however, to provide better estimates of
whether baseline imaging deficits can predict medication response.
In conclusion, both psychostimulants and atomoxetine appear to enhance the activation of right
IFC, presumably via their shared mechanism of action on catecholamines in frontal brain regions, but
they seem to also have drug-specific effects in other
frontal and subcortical regions. Further studies,
however, are needed to disentangle the shared and
specific drug effects of atomoxetine relative to stimulant medication on ADHD brain function.

Disorder-specificity of ADHD
brain abnormalities compared
to other childhood disorders
For neuroimaging to be clinically relevant it is crucial to establish ‘disorder-specific’ biomarkers that
can help with differential diagnosis and differential
treatment decisions. The childhood pathology that
is most commonly comorbid with ADHD is CD/
ODD. However, hardly any imaging studies have
controlled for CD/ODD and hence the ADHD im-

www.neurologia.com Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

Inaugural Conference

aging literature is confounded by this comorbidity.
Two sMRI studies compared the two disorders.
One found no disorder-specific differences between
comorbid children with ADHD with and without
CD, but shared volume reductions in posterior and
inferior cerebellar vermis [88]. The other study
found reduced GM in several frontal and parietotemporal regions in CD relative to ADHD and control children, while ADHD patients had only reduced regional GM deficit in a left dorsolateral/
precentral prefrontal lobe region relative to controls. Also there was a shared GM deficit between
both disorders in left dorsolateral/precentral gyri.
However, all analyses were conducted at uncorrected thresholds and the ADHD findings were not
consistent with the prior literature [89]. A series of
fMRI studies from our lab compared well differentiated medication-naïve and IQ-matched groups of
children with non-comorbid CD and non-comorbid ADHD during 5 disorder-relevant executive
function tasks of response and interference inhibition, sustained attention, saliency detection and
cognitive switching. Despite no performance differences, in 4 of the 5 tasks, patients with ADHD
had disorder-specific reduced activation compared
to both healthy controls and CD patients in the
IFC/DLPFC [90-93]. CD children, on the other
hand, showed underactivation in paralimbic regions during all tasks, including temporal lobe during performance monitoring [93], the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex during reward [90] and limbic areas during sustained attention [90], in line with
consistent evidence for structural and function deficits in CD in the paralimbic system, comprising
ventromedial OFC and interconnected limbic structures that mediate motivation and affect control [4].
Two studies compared ADHD children with and
without CD and psychopathy traits, and found that
the comorbid group only had reduced amygdala activation and reduced connectivity between amygdala and vmPFC in relation to fear [94], but enhanced
activation in vmPFC during punished reversal errors [95]. Therefore it appears that there are disorder-specific and process-related dissociations in
prefrontal lobe deficits, with ADHD children having consistent problems with the recruitment of
lateral IFC/DLPFC systems in the context of ‘cool’
executive inhibitory and attention control, whereas
CD children have problems with the recruitment of
‘hot’ ventromedial OFC-limbic systems that mediate motivation [4].
Disorder-specific reduction in IFC activation in
children with ADHD was also observed when compared to children with obsessive-compulsive disor-

www.neurologia.com

Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

der (OCD) during tasks of motor response inhibition and switching [96,97]. OCD patients, in turn,
had shared abnormalities with ADHD patients in
the OFC and DLPFC [96,97]. During a saliency task
inverse activation patterns were observed with PCC
and basal ganglia being underactivated in ADHD
relative to OCD, who had increased activation in
these regions relative to controls and ADHD boys
[97], in line with evidence for diminished saliency
processing in ADHD, but enhanced saliency processing in OCD. While no structural studies have
directly compared between OCD and ADHD, two
meta-analyses of VBM studies in each disorder
showed differential abnormalities in the basal ganglia, which were reduced in GM in ADHD [18], but
enhanced in OCD [98].
Two sMRI and 2 fMRI studies have compared
adolescents with ADHD and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The first sMRI study found shared abnormalities in limbic and parietal regions which,
however, did not survive correction for multiple
testing [99]. A study using multivariate pattern recognition analysis found relatively high specificity of
about 80% of classifying ADHD patients relative to
both controls and ASD patients based on brain patterns of later developing lateral fronto-striato-cerebellar networks for the classification of healthy
controls and of earlier developing ventromedial
fronto-limbic regions for the classification of ADHD
patients [100]. A task-based fMRI study showed
shared dysfunction in DLPFC-striato-thalamic regions and shared problems with the deactivation of
the DMN in both disorders during a parametric
sustained attention task. ASD patients, however,
had presumably compensatory increased cerebellar
activation and less pronounced DLPFC underfunction relative to ADHD, which may underlie their
spared task performance deficits which were only
observed in ADHD [21]. A resting state fMRI study
reported shared network centrality abnormalities
in precuneus for both disorders, but ADHD-specific increases in degree centrality in right striatum/
pallidum relative to controls and ASD, while ASDspecific increases in degree centrality were observed in predominantly left temporo-limbic areas,
which are typical areas for socio-emotion processing that have consistently been found to be abnormal in ASD [101].
Several imaging studies have compared ADHD
with bipolar disorder (BD). Two pediatric sMRI
studies found contrasting associations of decreased
volumes of caudate and putamen with ADHD and
increased volumes of caudate, putamen, globus pallidus and ventral striatum as well as additional lim-

S9

K. Rubia, et al

bic abnormalities with BD [102,103]. The comorbid
group was either non-impaired [102] or more like
the pure BD group [103]. Two adult sMRI found
that pure ADHD was associated with reduced GM
volumes and cortical thickness in prefrontal, cingulate, parieto-temporal and cerebellar regions, whilst
pure BD was associated with smaller left orbital
prefrontal and larger right thalamic and parietotemporal regions [104,105]. In both studies the comorbid disorder showing combinatorial deficits
[104,105]. A third study showed that BD alone was
associated with thinning in middle, ventral PFC and
ACC, while an interaction effect between both disorders was observed in the thinning of left OFC
and subgenual ACC [106]. Last, a DTI study testing
for differences in 8 fiber tracts reported reduction
in 7 WM tracts in ADHD, while BD had shared abnormalities with ADHD in only one of the frontal
WM tracts, i.e., the anterior corona radiata and the
splenium, connecting posterior attention regions
[35]. The findings suggest a global dysmaturation of
WM tracts in ADHD, with more specific abnormalities in frontal and parietal WM tracts in BD.
Overall, the structural imaging studies show more
prominent OFC-limbic abnormalities for BD and
more prominent lateral fronto-striato-parieto-temporal deficits in ADHD and differential basal ganglia volumes sizes (enlarged in BD and reduced in
ADHD). Similar findings have been observed in
fMRI studies. During inhibition tasks, ADHD children showed decreased activation relative to BD in
typical inhibition regions of IFG/VLPFC, DLPFC
and temporo-parietal regions, whereas BD children
had reduced occipital and postcentral activation
relative to ADHD [107]. During an emotional valence Stroop task, ADHD patients had reduced
VLPFC activation relative to healthy controls while
BD relative to healthy controls and ADHD showed
increased activation of the VLPFC and ACC [107].
During an affective 2-back working memory task,
BD patients had increased activation in bilateral
caudate relative to ADHD for happy faces, while for
angry faces, the BD group showed increased activation relative to the ADHD group in emotion-regulation areas of left medial OFC and left subgenual
ACC, whereas the ADHD group showed increased
activation in ‘cool’ EF working memory regions of
DLPFC and SMA [108]. Overall, both the structural
and functional comparisons suggest that the emotional impulsiveness of non-comorbid BD is more
consistently associated with OFC-limbic abnormalities, while the cognitive impulsivity of ADHD appears to be associated with ‘cool’ abnormalities in
cognitive VLPFC/IFC-striato-parietal circuits [109].

S10

In conclusion, relatively few and small-sampled
studies have compared between ADHD and other
disorders. There is evidence that ADHD patients
have more pronounced dysfunctions in lateral IFC/
DLPFC relative to CD, OCD [4], BD [109] and possibly ASD [21]. In addition, there is evidence that
the basal ganglia structure and function may be different between ADHD and both BD and OCD [18,
97,98,102,103,108]. Future larger sampled comparisons in groups of non-comorbid and comorbid patients, however, will be necessary to establish disorder-specific structural and functional biomarkers.

Clinical application of neuroimaging in ADHD
Despite consistent evidence for brain structure and
function deficits in ADHD, currently ADHD is diagnosed solely on the basis of subjective clinical
and rating measures, which are often unreliable.
Attempts to find objective neuroimaging biomarkers for ADHD, however, have been limited by the
use of traditional univariate group statistical analyses, where subjects in both groups typically overlap
and effect sizes are small. In contrast, multivariate
pattern analyses for imaging data can make predictions (e.g. of class membership) for individual subjects as opposed to group-level inferences and have
been successfully applied to other disorders [110].
To date, few imaging studies have used multivariate pattern recognition analyses techniques to
classify ADHD patients. A recent competition to
apply multivariate methods on a multicenter resting state functional and anatomical imaging dataset
of 285 children and adolescents with ADHD and
491 healthy controls (ADHD-200 Consortium;
http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/adhd200/)
was met by a range of classification approaches
[111-114]. Accuracies derived by internal crossvalidation ranged from 55-78% [114].
A few recent studies used probabilistic classification models such as Gaussian Process Classifiers
(GPCs), which provide estimates of predictive uncertainty and can accommodate unbalanced diagnostic settings or variations in disease prevalence,
which are crucial for clinical applications [115,116].
Three studies from our lab used GPC in structural
and functional imaging data in adolescents with
ADHD and showed a relatively high overall classification accuracy of between 75% and 80% with
relatively small numbers of between 20 and 33 patients [100,117,118]. Interestingly, across all studies the brain structure and function patterns that
classified controls were in later developing lateral

www.neurologia.com Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

Inaugural Conference

fronto-striato-parieto-cerebellar networks, while
patterns that classified ADHD were in earlier developing ventromedial prefrontal and limbic regions [100,117,118]. Importantly, one of the studies showed that the classification accuracy was
disorder-specific compared to ASD adolescents
[100], which is crucial for the potential future use
of neuroimaging as an aid for ‘differential’ diagnosis. Another recent study used a semi-supervised
clustering algorithm based on the spatial patterns
of variation across the morphological surfaces of
numerous cortical and subcortical brain regions to
disorder-specifically diagnose, with relatively high
accuracy of almost 90%, youth with ADHD relative
to Tourette syndrome [119]. These studies are a
promising first step towards the translational use
of neuroimaging as a potential differential diagnostic aid. Future studies will have to test whether
classification algorithms are stable across patient
population, countries and scanners as well as their
ability to classify ADHD subgroups and to determine disorder-specific classification. While imaging-based classification algorithms are unlikely to
replace clinical assessment and diagnosis, they may
be a useful objective, automated, and reliable complementary diagnostic tool that could reduce variability in clinical practice and, ultimately, help to
improve diagnostic accuracy. They also have the
potential to help with prognosis of disease progression or treatment choice.

Discussion
The last two decades of neuroimaging have significantly broadened our understanding of the underlying neurobiology of ADHD. They have shown that
ADHD is most prominently associated with the
dysmorphology, dysfunction and underconnectivity of multiple fronto-striato-parietal and frontocerebellar networks that mediate ‘cool’ EF, such as
the ventral fronto-ACC/SMA-striato-thalamic cognitive control system, the dorsal and ventral frontostriato-thalamo-parieto-cerebellar attention systems and ventral fronto-striato-parieto-cerebellar
timing networks. In addition, ADHD children have
structural, functional and connectivity deficits in
DMN systems that appear to be poorly deactivated
during task performance and hence to intrude upon
task-positive cognitive systems, leading to impaired
EF. Furthermore, there is emerging evidence for
OFC-limbic abnormalities in the context of reward
processing, with particular implication for the ventral striatum, which, however, needs to be con-

www.neurologia.com

Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

firmed in larger-scale imaging studies, given that
the findings are based on ROI analyses and confounded by comorbidity with CD. There is evidence
for a delay in normal brain maturation from structural imaging studies, with indications that this may
also apply to brain function and structural and
functional connectivity. Studies on the clinically
relevant question of disorder-specificity of imaging
biomarkers for ADHD are only just emerging, but
point towards potential disorder-specificity of ventral prefrontal under-recruitment relative to CD,
OCD and BD [4,109] as well as of differential basal
ganglia deficits relative to OCD and BD [18,109].
fMRI studies have shown that the most consistent mechanism of action of psychostimulants in
ADHD is the upregulation and normalisation of the
activation of the IFC and the basal ganglia. Studies
on atomoxetine effects on brain function have only
just emerged, but acute effects on prefrontal systems appear to be similar to those of psychostimulant medication. Some evidence from retrospective
comparisons suggests long-term plastic medication
effects on brain structure, function and neurochemistry, which, however, need to be confirmed in
prospective randomized controlled designs. PET
studies will need to investigate the underlying neurotransmitter abnormalities in ADHD other than
the DA system, such as the serotonin, noradrenalin,
glutamate and GABA systems with a particular emphasis on how they interact with the dysfunctional
DA system.
The imaging literature of ADHD is confounded
by relatively small numbers of often non-representative samples of convenience, by the use of ROI
analyses and liberal uncorrected thresholds and by
uncontrolled comorbidity with CD/ODD. Adult
studies suffer from comorbidy confounds with secondary affective conditions and ascertainment bias
from clinics, which do not capture remitted cases.
The majority of imaging studies have been conducted in long-term medicated patients, which, as
discussed, has an effect on structure and function,
and is hence a crucial confound.
Given that cross-sectional imaging studies are
confounded by cohort effects and ascertainment
bias, there is an urgent need for longitudinal imaging studies, in particular following up children with
ADHD into adulthood, to understand brain mechanisms of remittance and persistence. Furthermore,
future studies will need to focus on multimodal imaging in representative populations to enhance our
holistic understanding on the relationship between
structural, functional, connectivity, blood flow as
well as brain chemistry abnormalities within the

S11

K. Rubia, et al

same patient groups. Also, future studies will need
to focus on understanding the (differential) neurobiological basis of different ADHD subtypes as well
as comorbid cases. Future studies therefore ideally
should be longitudinal, multimodal, and tied to epidemiological samples.
Clinical translation of neuroimaging will be the
challenge over the next decade. Several pioneering
machine learning approaches using GPC have been
promising, showing relatively high accuracy of up
to 80% in classifying ADHD patients relative to
controls and ASD patients based on structural or
functional imaging scans. Multimodal multivariate
approaches including several imaging as well as
non-imaging modalities may provide higher classification accuracies than unimodal studies [110].
These multivariate classification methods, if successful and replicated across different representative patient groups, scanners and demographic
populations, may be able to help with future imaging-based diagnosis or prognosis of individual patients and provide brain-based patient stratification
and more personalised medicine.
Last, there is high potential for using neuroimaging as a neurotherapy. EEG-based neurofeedback
has been shown to have similar effect sizes to stimulant medication in reducing ADHD behaviours
[120]. fMRI or near infrared-spectroscopy (NIRS)
have better spatial resolution and combined with
neurofeedback could be used to upregulate the activation of ADHD-specific dysfunctional brain regions such as IFC, DLPFC and the basal ganglia
(with fMRI only). Likewise, regional electrical stimulation via repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) have been successful in other psychiatric disorders [121] and are promising for
ADHD. So far, only one pilot study tested rTMS
over right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in one single session in 13 ADHD adults and found increases
in behavioural attention scores [122].
In conclusion, we have acquired substantial
knowledge on the underlying neurobiological
mechanisms of ADHD. However, more studies are
needed that integrate different imaging modalities
to understand the interplay between the changes in
neurochemistry, brain function and brain structure
and to assess longitudinal trajectories of the disorder. The next decade will need to focus on using
neuroimaging techniques in a more clinically applied fashion, either to aid with individual diagnosis, prognosis of disease progression and treatment
success or as a neurotherapy to normalise abnormally functioning brain regions.

S12

References
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders, fourth edition. Washington DC:
APA; 2000.
Biederman J, Petty CR, Woodworth KY, Lomedico A, Hyder LL,
Faraone SV. Adult outcome of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: a controlled 16-year follow-up study. J Clin Psychiatry
2012; 73: 941-50.
Rubia K. Functional neuroimaging across development:
a review. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2013; 22: 719-31.
Rubia K. ‘Cool’ inferior fronto-striatal dysfunction in attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd) versus ‘hot’ ventromedial
orbitofronto-limbic dysfunction in conduct disorder: a review.
Biol Psychiatry 2011; 69: e69-87.
Willcutt EG, Sonuga-Barke EJS, Nigg JT, Sergeant GA.
Recent developments in neuropsychological models of childhood
psychiatric disorders. In Banaschewski T, Rohde LA, eds.
Biological child psychiatry. Recent trends and developments.
Basel: Karger; 2008. p. 195-226.
Rubia K, Halari R, Christakou A, Taylor E. Impulsiveness
as a timing disturbance: neurocognitive abnormalities in
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder during temporal
processes and normalization with methylphenidate. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009; 364: 1919-31.
Noreika V, Falter C, Rubia K. Timing deficits in patients
with ADHD. Neuropsychologia 2012; 51: 235-66.
Valera EM, Faraone SV, Murray KE, Seidman LJ. Metaanalysis of structural imaging findings in attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2007; 61: 1361-9.
Hoekzema E, Carmona S, Ramos-Quiroga JA, RicharteFernández V, Picado M, Bosch R, et al. Laminar thickness
alterations in the fronto-parietal cortical mantle of patients
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. PLoS One 2012;
7: e48286.
Shaw P, Malek M, Watson B, Sharp W, Evans A, Greenstein D.
Development of Cortical surface area and gyrification in attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2012; 72: 191-7.
Shaw P, Malek M, Watson B, Greenstein D, De Rossi P,
Sharp W. Trajectories of Cerebral cortical development
in childhood and adolescence and adult attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2013; 74: 599-606.
Cubillo A, Halari R, Smith A, Giampietro V, Taylor E, Rubia K.
Fronto-cortical and fronto-subcortical brain abnormalities
in children and adults with ADHD: a review and evidence
for fronto-striatal dysfunctions in adults with ADHD followed
up from childhood during motivation and attention. Cortex
2012; 48 194-215.
Lopez-Larson MP, King JB, Terry J, McGlade EC, YurgelunTodd D. Reduced insular volume in attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. Psychiatr Res 2012; 204: 32-9.
Plessen KJ, Bansal R, Zhu HT, Whiteman R, Amat J,
Quackenbush GA, et al. Hippocampus and amygdala
morphology in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006; 63: 795-807.
Ivanov I, Bansal R, Hao XJ, Zhu HT, Kellendonk C, Miller L,
et al. Morphological abnormalities of the thalamus in youths
with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J
Psychiatry 2010; 167: 397-408.
Arnsten A, Rubia K. Neurobiological circuits regulating
attention, movement and emotion and their disruptions in
pediatric neuropsychiatric disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 2012; 51: 356-67.
Ellison-Wright I, Ellison-Wright Z, Bullmore E. Structural
brain change in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
identified by meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry 2008; 8: 51.
Nakao T, Radua C, Rubia K, Mataix-Cols D. Gray matter volume
abnormalities in ADHD and the effects of stimulant medication:
voxel-based meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry 2011; 168: 1154-63.
Frodl T, Skokauskas N. Meta-analysis of structural MRI studies
in children and adults with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder indicates treatment effects. Acta Psychiatr Scand
2012; 125: 114-26.

www.neurologia.com Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

Inaugural Conference

20. Fusar-Poli P, Rubia K, Rossi G, Sartori G, Ballotin U. Dopamine
transporter alterations in ADHD: pathophysiology or adaptation
to psychostimulants? A meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry 2012;
169: 264-72.
21. Christakou A, Murphy C, Chantiluke C, Cubillo A, Smith A,
Giampietro V, et al. Disorder-specific functional abnormalities
during sustained attention in youth with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder and with autism. Mol Psychiatry 2013;
18: 236-44.
22. Hart H, Radua J, Mataix D, Rubia K. Meta-analysis of fMRI
studies of timing functions in ADHD. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
2012; 36: 2248-56.
23. Broyd SJ, Demanuele C, Debener S, Helps SK, James CJ,
Sonuga-Barke EJS. Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental
disorders: a systematic review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2009;
33: 279-96.
24. Shaw P, Eckstrand K, Sharp W, Blumenthal J, Lerch JP,
Greenstein D, et al. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
is characterized by a delay in cortical maturation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2007; 104: 19649-54.
25. Cortese S, Imperati D, Zhou J, Proal E, Klein RG, Mannuzza S,
et al. White matter alterations at 33-year follow-up in adults
with childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol
Psychiatry 2013; 74: 591-8.
26. Konrad A, Dielentheis TF, El Masri D, Bayerl M, Fehr C,
Gesierich, T, et al. Disturbed structural connectivity is related
to inattention and impulsivity in adult attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Eur J Neurosci 2010; 31: 912-9.
27. Konrad K, Eickhoff SB. Is the ADHD brain wired differently?
A review on structural and functional connectivity in attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Hum Brain Mapp 2010; 31: 904-16.
28. Dramsdahl M, Westerhausen R, Haavik J, Hugdahl K,
Plessen KJ. Adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
–a diffusion-tensor imaging study of the corpus callosum.
Psychiatry Res 2012; 201: 168-73.
29. Konrad A, Dielentheis TF, El Masri D, Dellani PR, Stoeter P,
Vucurevic G, et al. White matter abnormalities and their
impact on attentional performance in adult attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci
2012; 262: 351-60.
30. Cao Q, Shu N, An L, Wang P, Sun L, Xia MR, et al.
Probabilistic diffusion tractography and graph theory
analysis reveal abnormal white matter structural connectivity
networks in drug-naive boys with attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. J Neurosci 2013; 33: 10676-87.
31. Van Ewijk H, Heslenfeld DJ, Zwiers MP, Buitelaar JK,
Oosterlaan J. Diffusion tensor imaging in attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2012; 36: 1093-106.
32. Chuang TC, Wu MT, Huang SP, Weng MJ, Yang P. Diffusion
tensor imaging study of white matter fiber tracts in adolescent
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatry Res 2013;
211: 186-7.
33. Silk T, Vance A, Rinehart N, Bradshaw J, Cunnington R.
Diffusion tensor imaging in attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. J Neural Transm 2007; 114: Lxxii-Lxxii.
34. Yap QJ, Teh I, Fusar-Poli P, Sum MY, Kuswanto C, Sim K.
Tracking cerebral white matter changes across the lifespan:
insights from diffusion tensor imaging studies. J Neural
Transm 2013; 120: 1369-95.
35. Pavuluri MN, Yang S, Kamineni K, Passarotti AM,
Srinivasan G, Harral EM, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging
study of white matter fiber tracts in pediatric bipolar disorder
and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry
2009; 65: 586-93.
36. Nagel BJ, Bathula D, Herting M, Schmitt C, Kroenke CD,
Fair D, et al. Altered white matter microstructure in children
with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2011; 50: 283-92.
37. Cortese S, Kelly C, Chabernaud C, Proal E, Di Martino A,
Milham MP, et al. Toward systems neuroscience of ADHD:
a meta-analysis of 55 fMRI studies. Am J Psychiatry 2012;
169: 1038-55.

www.neurologia.com

Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

38. Hart H, Radua J, Mataix D, Rubia K. Meta-analysis of fMRI
studies of inhibition and attention in ADHD: exploring
task-specific, stimulant medication and age effects. JAMA
Psychiatry 2013; 70: 185-98.
39. Wiener M, Turkeltaub P, Coslett HB. The image of time:
a voxel-wise meta-analysis. Neuroimage 2010; 49: 1728-40.
40. Plichta MM, Scheres A. Ventral-striatal responsiveness
during reward anticipation in ADHD and its relation to trait
impulsivity in the healthy population: a meta-analytic review
of the fMRI literature. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2014; 38: 125-34.
41. Castellanos FX, Proal E. Large-scale brain systems in ADHD:
beyond the prefrontal-striatal model. Trends Cogn Sci 2012;
16: 17-26.
42. Wang L, Zhu CZ, He Y, Zang YF, Cao QJ, Zhang H, et al.
Altered small-world brain functional networks in children
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Hum Brain Mapp
2009; 30: 638-49.
43. Sun L, Cao Q, Long X, Sui M, Cao X, Zhu C, et al. Abnormal
functional connectivity between the anterior cingulate and
the default mode network in drug-naive boys with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatry Res 2012; 201: 120-7.
44. Fair DA, Posner J, Nagel BJ, Bathula D, Dias TGC, Mills KL,
et al. Atypical default network connectivity in youth with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2010;
68: 1084-91.
45. Uddin LQ, Kelly AMC, Biswal BB, Margulies DS, Shehzad Z,
Shaw D, et al. Network homogeneity reveals decreased
integrity of default-mode network in ADHD. J Neurosci
Methods 2008; 169: 249-54.
46. Cao XH, Cao QJ, Long XY, Sun L, Sui MQ, Zhu CZ, et al.
Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity patterns
of the putamen in medication-naive children with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Brain Res 2009; 1303: 195-206.
47. Sato JR, Takahashi DY, Hoexter MQ, Massirer KB, Fujita A.
Measuring network’s entropy in ADHD: a new approach
to investigate neuropsychiatric disorders. Neuroimage 2013;
77: 44-51.
48. Cocchi L, Bramati IE, Zalesky A, Furukawa E, Fontenelle LF,
Moll J, et al. Altered Functional brain connectivity in a
non-clinical sample of young adults with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. J Neurosc 2012; 32: 17753-61.
49. Fair DA, Nigg JT, Iyer S, Bathula D, Mills KL, Dosenbach
NUF, et al. Distinct neural signatures detected for ADHD
subtypes after controlling for micro-movements in resting
state functional connectivity MRI data. Front Syst Neurosci
2012; 6: 80.
50. Posner J, Rauh V, Gruber A, Gat I, Wang Z, Peterson BS.
Dissociable attentional and affective circuits in medicationnaive children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Psychiatry Res 2013; 213: 24-30.
51. Rubia K, Halari R, Cubillo A, Mohammad M, Taylor E.
Methylphenidate normalises activation and functional
connectivity deficits in attention and motivation networks
in medication-naïve children with ADHD during a rewarded
Continuous Performance Task. Neuropharmacology 2009;
5: 640-52.
52. Vloet TD, Gilsbach S, Neufang S, Fink GR, HerpertzDahlmann B, Konrad K. Neural mechanisms of interference
control and time discrimination in attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
2010; 49: 356-67.
53. Cubillo A, Halari R, Ecker C, Giampietro V, Taylor E, Rubia K.
Reduced activation and inter-regional functional connectivity
of fronto-striatal networks in adults with childhood attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and persisting symptoms
during tasks of motor inhibition and cognitive switching.
J Psychiatr Res 2010; 44: 629-39.
54. Peterson BS, Potenza MN, Wang Z, Zhu H, Martin A, Marsh R,
et al. An FMRI study of the effects of psychostimulants on
default-mode processing during Stroop task performance
in youths with ADHD. Am J Psychiatry 2009; 166: 1286-94.
55. Wolf RC, Plichta MM, Sambataro F, Fallgatter AJ, Jacob C,
Lesch KP, et al. Regional brain activation changes and

S13

K. Rubia, et al

56.

57.

58.

59.
60.
61.
62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

S14

abnormal functional connectivity of the ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex during working memory processing in adults with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Hum Brain Mapp
2009; 30: 2252-66.
Fassbender C, Zhang H, Buzy WM, Cortes CR, Mizuiri D,
Beckett L, et al. A lack of default network suppression is
linked to increased distractibility in ADHD. Brain Res 2009;
1273: 114-28.
Clerkin SM, Schulz KP, Berwid OG, Fan J, Newcorn JH,
Tang CY, et al. Thalamo-cortical activation and connectivity
during response preparation in adults with persistent and
remitted ADHD. Am J Psychiatry 2013; 170: 1011-9.
Hoekzema E, Carmona S, Ramos-Quiroga JA, RicharteFernandez V, Bosch R, Soliva JC, et al. An independent
components and functional connectivity analysis of resting
state fMRI data points to neural network dysregulation in adult
ADHD. Hum Brain Mapp 2013; Feb 18. [Epub ahead of print].
Dosenbach NUF. Prediction of individual brain maturity
using fMRI. Science 2010; 329: 1358.
Sato JR, Hoexter MQ, Castellanos XF, Rohde LA. Abnormal
brain connectivity patterns in adults with ADHD: a coherence
study. PLoS One 2012; 7: e45671.
Wilens TE. Effects of methylphenidate on the catechol­
aminergic system in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Clin Psychopharmacol 2008; 28 (Suppl 2): S46-53.
Cubillo A, Smith A, Barrett N, Giampetro V, Brammer MJ,
Simmons A, et al. Shared and drug-specific effects of atomoxetine
and methylphenidate on inhibitory brain dysfunction in
medication-naive ADHD boys. Cereb Cortex 2014; 24: 174-85.
Rubia K, Halari R, Cubillo A, Smith A, Mohammad M,
Brammer M, et al. Methylphenidate normalises fronto-striatal
underactivation during interference inhibition in medicationnaive boys Neuropsychopharmacology 2011; 36: 1575-86.
Rubia K, Halari R, Taylor E, Brammer M. Methylphenidate
normalises fronto-cingulate underactivation during error
processing in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2011; 70: 255-62.
Rubia K, Alzamora A, Cubillo A, Smith AB, Radua J,
Brammer MJ. Effects of stimulants on brain function in ADHD:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Biol Psychiatry 2013;
Oct 24. [Epub ahead of print].
Epstein JN, Casey BJ, Tonev ST, Davidson MC, Reiss AL,
Garrett A, et al. ADHD- and medication-related brain
activation effects in concordantly affected parent-child dyads
with ADHD. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2007; 48: 899-913.
Smith A, Cubillo A, Barrett N, Giampietro V, Simmons A,
Brammer M, et al. Neurofunctional effects of methylphenidate
and atomoxetine in boys with ADHD during time discrimination.
Biol Psychiatry 2013; 74: 615-22.
Cubillo A, Smith A, Barrat N, Giampietro V, Simmons A,
Brammer M, et al. Drug-specific laterality effects on frontal
lobe activation of atomoxetine and methylphenidate in ADHD
boys during working memory. Psychol Med 2013; 19: 1-14.
Kobel M, Bechtel N, Weber P, Specht K, Klarhofer M,
Scheffler K, et al. Effects of methylphenidate on working
memory functioning in children with attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Eur J Paediatr Neurol 2009; 13: 516-23.
Vaidya CJ, Austin G, Kirkorian G, Ridlehuber HW,
Desmond JE, Glover GH, et al. Selective effects of
methylphenidate in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:
a functional magnetic resonance study. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1998; 95: 14494-9.
Posner J, Maia TV, Fair D, Peterson BS, Sonuga-Barke EJ,
Nagel BJ. The attenuation of dysfunctional emotional processing
with stimulant medication: an fMRI study of adolescents
with ADHD. Psychiatry Res 2011; 193: 151-60.
Konrad K, Neufang S, Fink GR, Herpertz-Dahlmann B.
Long-term effects of methylphenidate on neural networks
associated with executive attention in children with ADHD:
results from a longitudinal functional MRI study. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2007; 46: 1633-41.
Mizuno K, Yoneda T, Komi M, Hirai T, Watanabe Y, Tomoda A.
Osmotic release oral system-methylphenidate improves neural

74.

75.
76.

77.

78.

79.
80.

81.

82.
83.

84.
85.

86.

87.

88.
89.
90.

91.

activity during low reward processing in children and
adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Neuroimage Clin 2013; 2: 366-76.
Bush G, Spencer TJ, Holmes J, Shin LM, Valera EM, Seidman LJ,
et al. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of methylphenidate
and placebo in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder during
the multi-source interference task. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2008;
65: 102-14.
Semrud-Clikeman M, Pliszka SR, Lancaster J, Liotti M.
Volumetric MRI differences in treatment-naive vs chronically
treated children with ADHD. Neurology 2006; 67: 2091.
Bledsoe J, Semrud-Clikeman M, Pliszka SR. A magnetic
resonance imaging study of the cerebellar vermis in chronically
treated and treatment-naive children with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder combined type. Biol Psychiatry 2009;
65: 620-4.
Ivanov I, Murrough JW, Bansal R, Hao X, Peterson BS.
Cerebellar morphology and the effects of stimulant medications
in youths with attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2014; 39: 718-26.
Sobel LJ, Bansal R, Maia TV, Sanchez J, Mazzone L, Durkin K,
et al. Basal ganglia surface morphology and the effects of
stimulant medications in youth with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Am J Psychiatry 2010; 167: 977-86.
Schnoebelen S, Semrud-Clikeman M, Pliszka SR. Corpus
callosum anatomy in chronically treated and stimulant naïve
ADHD. J Atten Disord 2010; 14: 256-66.
Castellanos FX, Lee PP, Sharp W, Jeffries NO, Greenstein DK,
Clasen LS, et al. Developmental trajectories of brain volume
abnormalities in children and adolescents with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. JAMA 2002; 288: 1740-8.
Shaw P, Sharp WS, Morrison M, Eckstrand K, Greenstein DK,
Clasen LS, et al. Psychostimulant treatment and the developing
cortex in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J
Psychiatry 2009; 166: 58-63.
Bledsoe JC, Semrud-Clikeman M, Pliszka SR. Anterior
cingulate cortex and symptom severity in attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. J Abnorm Psychol 2013; 122: 558-65.
Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Tomasi D, Kollins SH, Wigal TL,
Newcorn JH, et al. Methylphenidate-elicited dopamine
increases in ventral striatum are associated with long-term
symptom improvement in adults with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. J Neurosc 2012; 32: 841-9.
Hazell P. The challenges to demonstrating long-term effects of
psychostimulant treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Curr Opin Psychiatry 2011; 24: 286-90.
Bush G, Holmes J, Shin LM, Surman C, Makris N, Mick E,
et al. Atomoxetine increases fronto-parietal functional MRI
activation in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a pilot
study. Psychiatry Res 2013; 211: 88-91.
Schulz KP, Fan J, Bedard ACV, Clerkin SM, Ivanov I, Tang
CY, et al. Common and unique therapeutic mechanisms of
stimulant and nonstimulant treatments for attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012; 69: 952-61.
Li A, Cao XH, Cao Q, Sun L, Yang L, Zou Q, et al.
Methylphenidate normalizes resting-state brain dysfunction
in boys with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 2013; 38: 1287-95.
Bussing R, Grudnik J, Mason D, Wasiak M, Leonard C.
ADHD and conduct disorder: an MRI study in a community
sample. World J Biol Psychiatry 2002; 3: 216-20.
Stevens MC, Haney-Caron E. Comparison of brain volume
abnormalities between ADHD and conduct disorder in
adolescence. J Psychiatry Neurosci 2012; 37: 389-98.
Rubia K, Smith A, Halari R, Matukura F, Mohammad M,
Taylor E, et al. Disorder-specific dissociation of orbitofrontal
dysfunction in boys with pure conduct disorder during
reward and ventrolateral prefrontal dysfunction in boys
with pure attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder during
sustained attention. Am J Psychiatry 2009; 166: 83-94.
Rubia K, Halari R, Cubillo A, Mohammad A, Scott S,
Brammer M. Disorder-specific inferior frontal dysfunction
in boys with pure attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder

www.neurologia.com Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

Inaugural Conference

compared to boys with pure CD during cognitive flexibility.
Hum Brain Mapp 2010; 31: 1823-33.
92. Rubia K, Halari R, Smith AB, Mohammad M, Scott S,
Brammer MJ. Shared and disorder-specific prefrontal
abnormalities in boys with pure attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder compared to boys with pure CD during interference
inhibition and attention allocation. J Child Psychol Psychiatry
2009; 50: 669-78.
93. Rubia K, Halari R, Smith AB, Mohammed M, Scott S,
Giampietro V, et al. Dissociated functional brain abnormalities
of inhibition in boys with pure conduct disorder and in boys
with pure attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J
Psychiatry 2008; 165: 889-97.
94. Marsh AA, Finger EC, Michell DGV, Sims C, Kosson DS,
Towbin KE, et al. Reduced amygdala response to fearful
expressions in children and adolescents with callousunemotional traits and disruptive behaviour disorders.
Am J Psychiatry 2008; 165: 712-20.
95. Finger EC, Marsh AA, Mitchell DG, Reid ME, Sims C,
Budhani S, et al. Abnormal ventromedial prefrontal cortex
function in children with psychopathic traits during reversal
learning. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2008; 65: 586-94.
96. Rubia K, Cubillo A, Smith AB, Woolley J, Heyman I, Brammer MJ.
Disorder-specific dysfunction in right inferior prefrontal
cortex during two inhibition tasks in boys with attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder compared to boys with obsessivecompulsive disorder. Hum Brain Mapp 2010; 31: 287-99.
97. Rubia K, Cubillo A, Woolley J, Brammer MJ, Smith AB.
Disorder-specific dysfunctions in patients with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder compared to patients with
obsessive-compulsive disorder during interference inhibition
and attention allocation. Hum Brain Mapp 2011; 32: 601-11.
98. Radua J, Mataix-Cols D. Voxel-wise meta-analysis of grey
matter changes in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Br J
Psychiatry 2009; 195: 393-402.
99. Brieber S, Neufang S, Bruning N, Kamp-Becker I,
Remschmidt H, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, et al. Structural
brain abnormalities in adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder and patients with attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2007; 48: 1251-8.
100. Lim L, Cubillo A, Smith A, Chantiluke K, Marquand A,
Simmons A, et al. Disorder-specific predictive classification
of adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) relative to autism using structural magnetic resonance
imaging. PLOS One 2013; 8: e63660.
101. Di Martino A, Zuo XN, Kelly C, Grzadzinski R, Mennes M,
Schvarcz A, et al. Shared and distinct intrinsic functional
network centrality in autism and attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2013; 74: 623-32.
102. Liu IY, Howe M, Garrett A, Karchemskiy A, Kelley R, Alegria D,
et al. Striatal volumes in pediatric bipolar patients with and
without comorbid ADHD. Psychiatry Res 2011; 194: 14-20.
103. Lopez-Larson M, Michael ES, Terry JE, Breeze JL, Hodge SM,
Tang L, et al. Subcortical differences among youths with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder compared to those
with bipolar disorder with and without attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol
2009; 19: 31-9.
104. Biederman J, Makris N, Valera EM, Monuteaux MC,
Goldstein JM, Buka S, et al. Towards further understanding
of the co-morbidity between attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder and bipolar disorder: a MRI study of brain volumes.
Psychol Med 2008; 38: 1045-56.
105. Makris N, Seidman LJ, Brown A, Valera EM, Kaiser JR, Petty CR,
et al. Further understanding of the comorbidity between
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and bipolar disorder
in adults: an MRI study of cortical thickness. Psychiatry Res
2012; 202: 1-11.

www.neurologia.com

Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

106. Hegarty CE, Foland-Ross LC, Narr KL, Sugar CA, McGough JJ,
Thompson PM, et al. ADHD comorbidity can matter when
assessing cortical thickness abnormalities in patients with
bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord 2012; 14: 843-55.
107. Passarotti AM, Sweeney JA, Pavuluri MN. Neural correlates
of response inhibition in pediatric bipolar disorder and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatry Res 2010;
181: 36-43.
108. Passarotti AM, Sweeney JA, Pavuluri MN. Emotion processing
influences working memory circuits in pediatric bipolar
disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2010; 49: 1064-80.
109. Passarotti AM, Pavuluri MN. Brain functional domains inform
therapeutic interventions in attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and pediatric bipolar disorder. Exp Rev Neurother
2011; 11: 897-914.
110. Orru G, Pettersson-Yeo W, Marquand AF, Sartori G,
Mechelli A. Using Support Vector Machine to identify imaging
biomarkers of neurological and psychiatric disease: a critical
review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2012; 36: 1140-52.
111. Cheng W, Ji X, Zhang J, Feng J. Individual classification of
ADHD patients by integrating multiscale neuroimaging markers
and advanced pattern recognition techniques. Front Syst
Neurosci 2012; 6: 58.
112. Colby JB, Rudie JD, Brown JA, Douglas PK, Cohen MS,
Shehzad Z. Insights into multimodal imaging classification
of ADHD. Front Syst Neurosci 2012; 6: 59.
113. Dai D, Wang J, Hua J, He H. Classification of ADHD children
through multimodal magnetic resonance imaging. Front Syst
Neurosci 2012; 6: 63.
114. Eloyan A, Muschelli J, Nebel MB, Liu H, Han F, Zhao T,
et al. Automated diagnoses of attention deficit hyperactive
disorder using magnetic resonance imaging. Front Syst
Neurosci 2012; 6: 61.
115. Marquand A, De Simoni S, O’Daly O, Mourao-Miranda J,
Mehta M. Quantifying the information content of brain
voxels using target information, Gaussian processes and
recursive feature elimination Qu. International Conference
on Pattern Recognition. Istanbul, Turkey; 2010.
116. Hahn T, Marquand AF, Plichta MM, Ehlis AC, Schecklmann
MW, Dresler T, et al. A novel approach to probabilistic
biomarker-based classification using functional near-infrared
spectroscopy. Hum Brain Map 2013; 34: 1102-14.
117. Hart H, Chantiluke K, Cubillo A, Smith A, Simmons A,
Marquand A, et al. Pattern classification of response inhibition
in ADHD: toward the development of neurobiological markers
for ADHD. Hum Brain Mapp; Oct 11. [Epub ahead of print].
118. Hart H, Smith A, Cubillo A, Simmons A, Marquand A,
Rubia K. Predictive neurofunctional markers of ADHD based
on pattern classification of temporal processing. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2014 [in press].
119. Bansal R, Staib LH, Laine AF, Hao XJ, Xu DR, Liu J, et al.
Anatomical brain images alone can accurately diagnose
chronic neuropsychiatric illnesses. PLoS One 2012; 7: e50698.
120. Arns M, De Ridder S, Strehl U, Breteler M, Coenen A.
Efficacy of neurofeedback treatment in ADHD: the effects
on inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity: a meta-analysis.
Clin EEG Neurosci 2009; 40: 180-9.
121. Demirtas-Tatlidede A, Vahabzadeh-Hagh AM, PascualLeone A. Can noninvasive brain stimulation enhance cognition
in neuropsychiatric disorders? Neuropharmacology 2013;
64: 566-78.
122. Bloch Y, Harel EV, Aviram S, Govezensky J, Ratzoni G,
Levkovitz Y. Positive effects of repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation on attention in ADHD subjects:
a randomized controlled pilot study. World J Biol Psychiatry
2010; 11: 755-8.

S15

K. Rubia, et al

Anomalías cerebrales en el trastorno por déficit de atención/hiperactividad: una revisión
Objetivo. Revisar los hallazgos de los estudios con resonancia magnética en el trastorno por déficit de atención/hiperactividad (TDAH) infantil y adulto.
Desarrollo. Dichos estudios han demostrado que el TDAH se caracteriza por la presencia de múltiples anomalías de carácter estructural y funcional, primordialmente en los circuitos frontoestriatales, pero también en los circuitos frontoparietotemporales, frontocerebelares e, incluso, frontolímbicos. Los datos aportados por los estudios longitudinales de resonancia magnética estructural demuestran que el TDAH se caracteriza por un retraso en la maduración estructural del cerebro.
Esta conclusión se ve reforzada por los indicios indirectos ofrecidos por los estudios de cortes transversales, que indican
la existencia de una inmadurez sustancial tanto en la función cerebral como en los patrones de conectividad estructural
y funcional, indicios que, sin embargo, están pendientes de confirmar en estudios longitudinales. La alteración funcional
de la corteza prefrontal ventrolateral parece estar más afectada en el TDAH que en otros trastornos pediátricos, y existen
algunos indicios de anomalías distintivas en los ganglios basales. Un metaanálisis sobre los efectos de los estimulantes
en la función cerebral demuestra que el mecanismo de acción agudo más congruente de los fármacos psicoestimulantes
consiste en el aumento de la activación de la corteza prefrontal inferior y los ganglios basales. Los primeros intentos por
utilizar los datos de los estudios de neuroimagen para elaborar clasificaciones diagnósticas individuales de los niños con
TDAH a partir de técnicas de reconocimiento de patrones han cosechado resultados alentadores, pero todavía deben ser
replicados por más centros y aparatos de resonancia magnética.
Conclusiones. Durante los últimos 20 años, las técnicas de neuroimagen han perfilado los biomarcadores del TDAH, pero
es necesario que nuevos estudios descubran la utilidad clínica de esa información, como el uso de tales técnicas como instrumento de clasificación diagnóstica y pronóstica individualizada o como terapia para revertir las anomalías de la función
cerebral que han sido confirmadas durante los dos decenios anteriores.
Palabras clave. Atomoxetina. Imágenes con tensor de difusión (DTI). Metilfenidato. Psicoestimulantes. Resonancia magnética funcional (RMf). Trastorno por déficit de atención/hiperactividad (TDAH).

S16

www.neurologia.com Rev Neurol 2014; 58 (Supl 1): S3-S18

