Commentary

Biological
Psychiatry

Autism as a Disorder of Altered Global
Functional and Structural Connectivity
Ludger Tebartz van Elst, Andreas Riedel, and Simon Maier
For a long time, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) played only
a minor role in clinical adult psychiatry and psychotherapy.
This situation recently changed, particularly when high functioning variants of ASD were recognized as an underlying
basic disorder or personality structure on which secondary
forms of psychiatric reactions, such as in depression, anxiety,
or personality disorders, arise (1). From a clinical perspective,
it is important to recognize the autistic pattern for a more
comprehensive understanding of the psychodynamics of the
psychopathology. For example, a secondary conﬂict-induced
depressive syndrome can be explained by the conﬂictinducing rigidity, stereotypies, or interpersonal communication
difﬁculties of the patient as a sequela to the autistic
structure (1).
The psychobiological and social consequences of autistic
features are now considered to be independent from the
cause of autism. However, patients with autism as well as
physicians and scientists want to understand the causes of
this developmental disorder. Etiologically, it is well recognized
that autism does not represent a single disease entity. Rather,
autism is an umbrella term for etiologically heterogeneous
diseases with different neurobiological causes (2). In this
context, the distinction between secondary and primary forms
of autism has recently been suggested to reintroduce elements of causal thinking into the purely descriptive classiﬁcation of ASD in DSM-5 and ICD-11. Secondary autism is
represented by clear-cut monogenetic or oligogenetic syndromic variants or recognized acquired causes, such as
valproate exposure in utero, whereas in primary autism, no
such causes can be discovered (3). Still, primary autism runs in
families, and therefore a complex familial genetic pattern is
assumed in which $100 genes interacting with environmental
factors represent the heritability of autism (2,4).
However, despite different neurobiological causes, secondary and primary forms of autism must have some commonality
because the typical psychopathologic features of autism
(problems in social perception, social cognition, and communication; rigidity and the need for routines and stereotypies;
and perceptual abnormalities, such as the propensity for
sensory overﬂow, special interests, and gifts) do cluster. This
empirical observation is obvious to every clinician familiar with
ASD and supports the notion that there might be a common
ﬁnal pathophysiologic pathway to the different causes of
autism.
It has been suggested that the brain’s functional or
structural connectivity pattern might represent such a common ﬁnal pathway or neurobiological pathogenetic correlate of
the autistic phenotype where different ASD etiologies converge (3,5,6). Following this line of thought, the nonautistic or

holistic endophenotype is characterized by intensive longdistance cerebral communication as expressed by increased
functional or structural connectivity of separated brain regions
and circuits. This connectivity leads to a high degree of
synchronization of global cerebral information processing. In
contrast, the autistic pattern of information processing is
characterized by a reduced long-distance communication (5)
and enhanced “local network connectivity” (Figure 1) (7). In
this model, enhanced local network connectivity is not a
mandatory pattern in all ASD variants. However, the increased
likelihood for local neuronal networks to develop idiosyncratic
functional features might be a function of the reduced “holistic
control” of the global pattern of information processing (3), and
it might explain the increased prevalence of special capacities
or phenomena, such as synesthesia, in ASD.
This hypothesis of speciﬁcally altered neuronal network
connectivity has also been linked to the idea of an excitationinhibition dysbalance and the increased prevalence of epilepsy
and electroencephalography pathologies in autism (2,3). The
enhanced excitation-inhibition dysbalance or subclinical epileptiform discharges represent one of the different possible
causes that stimulate the restructuring of the global neuronal
network into the autistic pattern of connectivity (3). In this
theory, pathologic excitatory discharges that gain access to
the global network through long-distance connections are
counteracted by the global network in a homeostatic move
to maintain functional equilibrium. Dampening or terminating
affected long-distance connections might induce the same
autistic pattern of information processing caused by the
interplay of several hundred genes in primary autism
(Figure 1). This pathogenetic theory of autism, as a correlate
of a speciﬁc functional/structural connectivity pattern, is able
to integrate secondary forms of autism in the context of
epilepsy, which are categorical in nature, as well as dimensional variants as represented by primary familial autism.
In this issue of Biological Psychiatry, Nebel et al. (8) present
intriguing evidence in support of such etiopathogenetic models of autism. They start with the observation that impairments
in visuomotor integration, which are thought to be related to
the brain’s wiring, are well-documented phenomena in autism.
Based on the above-illustrated model, they hypothesize that
long-range visuomotor functional connectivity would be
reduced in children with ASD compared with their typically
developing peers. To test this hypothesis, the authors investigated 50 children 8–12 years old with autism and compared
them with 50 typically developing 8- to 12-year-old children by
acquiring resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging
data in all subjects. Behavioral and psychometric data
included social deﬁcit severity, imitation capacities, and

SEE CORRESPONDING ARTICLE ON PAGE 633

626
& 2016 Society of Biological Psychiatry
Biological Psychiatry April 15, 2016; 79:626–627 www.sobp.org/journal

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.02.003
ISSN: 0006-3223

Biological
Psychiatry

Commentary

leaving local networks and circuits the cybernetic “freedom” to
develop idiosyncratic properties. This pathogenetic theory is
heuristically strong in that it can explain how different causal
pathways of secondary (monogenetic, oligogenetic, acquired)
or primary (polygenetic familial) autism can lead to a similar
clinical picture. By including dimensional and categorical
features, such a model might prove useful in explaining
the neurobiological nature of autism in different patient
subgroups.

Acknowledgments and Disclosures
Figure 1. Illustration of autism as an altered functional/structural pattern
of network connectivity. The nonautistic or holistic mode of information
processing (neurotypical control subjects) is characterized by the intensive
cross-talk of distant neuronal modules and circuits. In autism, there is less
long-distance communication.

gesture performance scores. The main ﬁnding was an
increased intrinsic asynchrony between higher order visual
information processing and motor area activity in children with
ASD. The authors were able to replicate this primary ﬁnding in
an independent sample from the Autism Brain Imaging Data
Exchange. The ﬁnding of unimpaired early visual information
processing with abnormal signals in higher level vision correlates with similar neurophysiologic and psychophysical ﬁndings in adults with high functioning primary ASD (9).
Psychometrically, Nebel et al. (8) show that the severity of
visuomotor activity desynchronization was associated with
more severe autistic traits and inversely linked to better
imitation capacities. They interpret their ﬁndings as a correlate
of reduced global neuronal network integration.
These ﬁndings support the model of a speciﬁcally altered
global neuronal network architecture in autism as outlined here
and in Figure 1. In this framework, the autistic mode of
information processing can be understood as an extreme
variant of a dimensional trait, which is probably caused by a
very large number of genes with small effect sizes. This is the
likely constellation of primary familial autism or the broader
autism phenotype. Such an “autistic connectivity pattern” can
also be induced by a single gene or a few genes with large
effect sizes (syndromal autism) or other causes such as
epilepsy, encephalitis, or valproate exposure in utero (secondary autism). Other recent research supports the theory that a
combination of categorical and dimensional factors has to be
considered to explain the complex causality of autism (10) and
that not only functional—as in the study by Nebel et al. (8)—
but also structural connectivity is a key factor in such
pathogenetic models of autism (6).
In conclusion, Nebel et al. (8) present solid evidence that
the autistic syndrome is linked to desynchronized processes
of long-distance or global cerebral information processing.
The data support a model of autism in which the ﬁnal
pathogenetic pathway is represented by a less centralized or
harmonized pattern of global neuronal information processing,

The authors report no biomedical ﬁnancial interests or potential conﬂicts of
interest.

Article Information
From the Section for Neuropsychiatry and Neurodevelopmental Disorder
Research Group, University Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,
Freiburg, Germany.
Address correspondence to Ludger Tebartz van Elst, M.D., Section for
Neuropsychiatry and Neurodevelopmental Disorder Research Group, University Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Hauptstr. 5, Freiburg
D-79104, Germany; E-mail: tebartzvanelst@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
Received Feb 2, 2016; revised and accepted Feb 4, 2016.

References
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Tebartz van Elst L, Pick M, Biscaldi M, Fangmeier T, Riedel A (2013):
High-functioning autism spectrum disorder as a basic disorder in adult
psychiatry and psychotherapy: Psychopathological presentation, clinical relevance and therapeutic concepts. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin
Neurosci 263:S189–S196.
Levy SE, Mandell DS, Schultz RT (2009): Autism. Lancet 374:
1627–1638.
Tebartz van Elst L, Maier S, Fangmeier T, Endres D, Mueller GT, Nickel
K, et al. (2014): Disturbed cingulate glutamate metabolism in adults
with high-functioning autism spectrum disorder: Evidence in support
of the excitatory/inhibitory imbalance hypothesis. Mol Psychiatry 19:
1314–1325.
Colvert E, Tick B, McEwen F, Stewart C, Curran SR, Woodhouse E,
et al. (2015): Heritability of autism spectrum disorder in a UK
population-based twin sample. JAMA Psychiatry 72:415–423.
Geschwind DH, Levitt P (2007): Autism spectrum disorders: Developmental disconnection syndromes. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:103–111.
Ameis SH, Catani M (2015): Altered white matter connectivity as a
neural substrate for social impairment in autism spectrum disorder.
Cortex 62:158–181.
Rinaldi T, Silberberg G, Markram H (2008): Hyperconnectivity of local
neocortical microcircuitry induced by prenatal exposure to valproic
acid. Cereb Cortex 18:763–770.
Nebel MB, Eloyan A, Nettles CA, Sweeney KL, Ament K, Ward RE,
et al. (2016): Intrinsic visual-motor synchrony correlates with social
deﬁcits in autism. Biol Psychiatry 79:633–641.
Kornmeier J, Wörner R, Riedel A, Bach M, Tebartz van Elst L (2014):
A different view on the checkerboard? Alterations in early and late
visually evoked EEG potentials in Asperger observers. PLoS One
9:e90993.
Elton A, Di Martino A, Hazlett HC, Gao W (2016): Neural connectivity
evidence for a categorical-dimensional hybrid model of autism
spectrum disorder. Biol Psychiatry; http://dxdoi.org/10.1016/j.biop
sych.2015.10.020.

Biological Psychiatry April 15, 2016; 79:626–627 www.sobp.org/journal

627

