Autism research news and opinion
International Meeting for Autism Research 2014
For the latest news, visit SFARI.org on the Web

Autism gene may be key to discovering new candidates
Jessica Wright

19 May 2014

CHD8, a gene that has emerged as one of the strongest risk
factors for autism, regulates the expression of more than half
of a set of 'high-confidence' risk genes for the disorder. The
unpublished data were presented Saturday at the 2014
International Meeting for Autism Research in Atlanta.
The results suggest that there may be more unidentified
autism risk factors among the list of CHD8 targets. "CHD8
binding itself may provide additional power to find and detect
[autism] risk genes," says James Noonan, associate professor
of genetics at Yale University, who presented the work.

Master regulator: CHD8 regulates how
the DNA in many autism risk genes winds
around its support proteins.

CHD8 dampens the expression of genes by regulating how
tightly DNA winds around support proteins, called histones. In
a 2012 study, researchers found spontaneous mutations in
CHD8 in nine people with autism and none of nearly 800
controls1. They estimated that mutations in this gene might
account for 0.4 percent of cases of autism.

In the work presented Saturday, Noonan and his team looked
at neurons from three sources to map all the spots in the genome at which CHD8 binds. They looked
at human stem cells induced to become neurons and at neurons taken either from human postmortem
fetal brains or from the developing mouse brain. Overall, CHD8 binds to sites at which genes are
actively expressed, supporting its key role in gene regulation.
The researchers then looked at a set of 116 autism risk genes, including 9 'high-confidence' genes,
meaning that they believe them to have a strong link to autism. CHD8 regulates significantly more of
these than one would expect to find by chance, they found.
CHD8 binds to 17 of 30 high-confidence risk genes (most of which are as yet unpublished) for which
researchers have found at least two examples of a spontaneous, harmful mutation in an individual
with autism. CHD8's targets in this list include FOXP1, DYRK1A and ADNP.
The researchers then grew neuronal stem cells that make little to no CHD8. This significantly changes
the expression of CHD8's targets, and in particular the autism risk genes, they found.
"This is really pointing to a very strong regulatory role of CHD8 in the biology of other risk genes for
autism," says Noonan.
For more reports from the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research, please click here.

News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.
References:
1: O’Roak B.J. et al. Science 338, 1619-1622 (2012) PubMed

Rats with mutant SHANK genes show autism-like behaviors
Jessica Wright

15 May 2014

Researchers have engineered two new rats with mutations in a family of
genes that function at neuronal junctions, or synapses, they reported today
at the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research in Atlanta.
The rat models have a mutation in either one or both copies
of SHANK2 or SHANK3. Rats are generally considered to be better than
mice for modeling neurological disorders such as autism because they show
complex play and other social behaviors. They also have larger brains than
mice do, permitting a more finely tuned investigation of their neural
pathways.

Treat pursuit: Rats with
a mutation in the SHANK2
gene press a lever for a
reward about a hundred
times more than controls
before giving up.

“We built a SHANK3-deficient rat model to understand the neural basis of
autism,” says Hala Harony-Nicolas, an instructor in psychiatry at the Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York, who presented the
SHANK3 work.
The rats with SHANK3 mutations have trouble remembering their peers
and focusing on a task. Those with SHANK2 mutations show
persistent repetitive behaviors and tend not to interact with other rats.
Treatment with oxytocin, a neurotransmitter famous for enhancing some
social skills, fixes many of the deficits seen in the SHANK3 rats. The
researchers did not test the effect of oxytocin on the SHANK2 rats.

“The oxytocin results are really intriguing,” says Jacqueline Crawley, professor of psychiatry at the
University of California, Davis, who was not involved in the study.
Drop anchors:

SHANK2 and SHANK3 sit at the receiving ends of synapses and mediate neuronal signaling.
Researchers have identified multiple mutations in these genes in people with autism, making them —
and SHANK3 in particular — strong candidate genes for the disorder.
The SHANK3 rats lack the region of the protein that anchors it to the synapse. They show problems
with attention: They are less accurate than controls when choosing between five touch screens that
release a treat when lit, for example. They also tend to forget, after about one day, a rat that they’ve
already met. But the rats still prefer the company of another rat to an object, and play normally when
young.
The researchers also placed electrodes into the rats’ brains to measure signals between two distant
brain regions, the hippocampus and the medial prefrontal cortex. The rats’ brains show defects in the
way they regulate the strength of the signals, the researchers found.

They also express several proteins at different levels than in controls. In particular, genes are
expressed differently in the hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex, which regulate cognitive
function and memory, and in the striatum — a brain region that helps regulate and coordinate
movement. The affected genes in the hippocampus and cortex are involved in fetal development,
whereas those in the striatum tend to be expressed during early childhood.
“SHANK3 may pose its effect in different brain regions during different developmental periods, and
may be affecting different mechanisms,” says Harony-Nicolas.
In contrast to rats with mutant SHANK3, those with mutations in both copies of SHANK2 play less
than controls do when young and are less likely to interact with other rats as adults. Meera Modi, a
neuroscience postdoctoral fellow at Pfizer in Cambridge, Massachusetts, presented the results.
The most significant features of the SHANK2 rats, however, are movements that resemble the
repetitive behaviors seen in autism. The rats tend to repeatedly rear up in their cages and almost all of
them circle incessantly.
To investigate the motivation driving these behaviors, the researchers tested how often the rats would
press a lever for a treat. Once taught that pressing this lever leads to a reward, most rats press it
multiple times, but give up eventually. The SHANK2 mutant rats press the lever about 100 times more
for the same treat than controls do. Blocking the chemical messenger dopamine in the SHANK2
mutant rats stops this behavior.
The next step is to read the rats’ brain activity using electroencephalography during this test, Modi
says. That would reveal whether behavioral training or drugs normalize the activity.
For more reports from the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research, please click here.
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.

Autism development may be obscured by parents' memory
Jessica Wright

17 May 2014

Parents may notice a loss of skills in their children as
it is happening, but do not recall it clearly later on.
The unpublished research, presented yesterday at
the 2014 International Meeting for Autism
Research in Atlanta, hints at a fatal flaw in diagnostic
tools for autism that rely on parents’ memory.
Regular screening by pediatricians would be a more
reliable way to pick up early signs of autism, says Sally
Ozonoff vice chair for research in psychiatry and
behavioral sciences at the University of California,
Davis MIND Institute, who presented the findings.
Clear questions: Parents may be better able to
assess their children’s abilities when asked detailed
questions that provide examples.

Another study presented yesterday suggests that
parents’ assessments better match those of clinicians
if they answer detailed questions, rather than give
ratings for abstract ideas.

Autism is usually diagnosed around 2 to 3 years of age, when problems with social skills and language
become most apparent. The findings presented at the meeting suggest that most children with autism
show a gradual decline in their social skills in their first two years of life, rather than a sudden loss of
skills at that age.
“This kind of regressive onset or declining behaviors is more the rule than the exception in autism,”
says Ozonoff. “It isn’t just the experts who can see it. The parents see it if they’re rating that day in real
time.”
Missed memory:

Ozonoff and her colleagues have been following the development of infant siblings of children with
autism, or baby sibs. These infants have a 20 times higher chance of developing autism than the
general population.
At the meeting, Ozonoff presented data from 20 baby sibs, all of whom developed autism, along with
40 typically developing controls.
The children came into the clinic six times in the first two years of their life. At each visit, clinicians
rated the children’s social behavior -- for example, whether they looked or smiled at the examiners or
responded to their own names. Parents also filled out the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised
(ADI-R), a widely used diagnostic tool, at each visit.
Overall, the researchers found that 86 percent of the children showed declining social skills over the

first two years. The data from the parents is similar: Nearly three-quarters of the parents had noted a
loss of social skills in their children when the researchers analyzed the parent assessments from each
visit.
Surprisingly, however, only 6 of these same 20 parents said that their children had lost skills when
they were asked this a year later. Relying on the ADI-R may mischaracterize the type of regression
seen in these children, says Ozonoff. “This is a little scary for using the ADI-R, which is our only
option once children are already diagnosed,” she says. “The majority are being classified into the
wrong group.”
In a similar study, Suzanne Macari showed data comparing parent ratings on the First Year Inventory
with in-depth clinical diagnosis using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, another popular
diagnostic tool. The study included 95 baby sibs and 66 controls.
Overall, parent assessments differed significantly from those made by clinicians. For example, parents
reported fewer problems with babbling, communication and gestures than the clinicians did. This may
be because the children are more likely to interact with their parents at home than with an examiner
in a clinic, says Macari, associate research scientist at the Yale Child Study Center in New Haven,
Connecticut.
The parents’ ratings better matched those of the clinicians when the researchers changed the
questions to be more specific. For example, asking “What do you have to do to get your child to turn
towards you?” got more accurate responses than “Does you child answer to his name?”
For more reports from the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research, please click here.
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.

Some infants at risk of autism show improvements at 9 months
Jessica Wright

17 May 2014

Some infant siblings of children with autism initially
behave like children with the disorder, but show
improvements in their social skills around 9 months of
age. The unpublished research, presented yesterday at
the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research in
Atlanta, suggests that these children possess a
“resilience” that keeps them from developing autism.

Kay Hinton
Eye gaze: As they grow older, infants with autism
spend less time looking at a woman’s eyes in a
video clip.

“By understanding this phenomenon, we may get many
more children who are at higher genetic risk to also end
up unaffected,” says Ami Klin, director of the Marcus
Autism Center in Atlanta, who presented the findings.
The 9-month mark may prove to be the ideal time for
early interventions, he says.

So-called baby sibs of children with autism are at up to a
20-fold higher risk of autism compared with the general
population. Many research groups track the development of baby sibs to identify early signs of
autism.
Klin and his colleagues discovered this intriguing finding when following up on the results of an
eye-tracking study published in November. The study made a splash in the popular media, reporting
that baby boys later diagnosed with autism lose interest in others’ eyes between 2 and 6 months of
age.
The study assessed 11 baby sibs who developed autism and 25 typically developing controls ten times
from 2 to 24 months of age. To measure early symptoms of autism, the researchers outfitted the
infants with an eye-tracking device and noted how often they looked at the eyes of a friendly woman in
a recorded video. “Eyes are not only the window to the soul, they are also the window to social
neuroscience,” says Klin.
At the meeting yesterday, Klin reported analysis from a few more children. As they grew up, 29
typically developing infants looked at the woman’s eyes the same amount or more, he said. By
contrast, 13 infants who were eventually diagnosed with autism focused on the eyes less and less with
age.
This drop in eye contact may relate to when babies stop looking at eyes reflexively and start actively
seeking them out as a form of communication, says Klin.
Klin also reported new findings from 28 baby sibs who do not have autism. Ten of these siblings have
some symptoms of autism, however — a condition called the broad autism phenotype (BAP).

Of the 28 siblings, 16 have eye-tracking patterns that are nearly indistinguishable from those of
controls. All but one of these siblings show no signs of autism.
The other 12 siblings showed a decline in eye contact in the first six months of life, similar to the
infants who went on to be diagnosed with autism; 9 of these 12 siblings have BAP.
The findings suggest that these 12 siblings started off on a course toward autism, but at some point
switched trajectories and started to improve, says Klin.
The researchers found that these siblings start to look more at eyes starting at 18 months of age, but
that this “course correction” in fact begins at 9 months. This suggests that interventions for autism
may need to start around the 9-month mark, says Klin. “We have a lot of nice treatment trials around
12 months,” he says. “But maybe we are already starting a little bit too late.“
For more reports from the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research, please click here.
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.
References:

1: Jones W. and A. Klin Nature 504, 427-431 (2013) PubMed

Adults with autism may have high burden of health problems
Jessica Wright

17 May 2014

Adults with autism may suffer from various health
problems, ranging from psychiatric conditions to
motor symptoms that resemble Parkinson’s disease,
according to two studies presented Thursday at the
2014 International Meeting for Autism Research in
Atlanta.

Aging in autism: Men over 50 with autism look old
for their age and may move particularly slowly, with a
rigid gait.

Some of the conditions may stem from people with
autism feeling like outsiders in society, says Lisa
Croen, director of the Autism Research Program at
Kaiser Permanente, an integrated healthcare delivery
system in California. Croen led one of the studies,
which documents the health status of more than
2,000 adults with autism.
“From our experience, inclusion and feeling part of
society really does impact on health status,” says
Croen. “It’s very important to include adults with

autism in all sections of society.”
The findings are also of concern given the rising numbers of children diagnosed with autism, the
researchers say. They highlight how little is known about adults with autism, many of whom may be
misdiagnosed with other conditions.
“There is almost no literature on older adults with autism in the field, so we have virtually no
knowledge base,” says Joseph Piven, professor of psychiatry at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, who presented the second study.
Piven and his colleagues pursued a “boots-on-the-ground approach,” sending queries to nearly 14,000
households and contacting several health agencies in North Carolina. After three years of searching,
they found 20 men with autism who were over 50 years old.
“I think the main finding is how hard it was for Joe Piven's group to find people,” says Catherine Lord,
director of the Center for Autism and the Developing Brain at New York-Presbyterian Hospital. Lord
has followed children with autism over long periods of time, but was not involved in either new study.
Hidden adults:

Most of the men in Piven’s group have markedly low intelligence quotients: 40 percent have IQs
under 35 and about 60 percent have IQs below 50. This is probably because to be diagnosed with
autism decades ago — when there was much less awareness about the disorder — they would have had

to have severe symptoms, says Piven.
One of the men in the study was among the first group of 11 people to be diagnosed by Leo Kanner in
1943. Some of the others received a diagnosis for the first time during the course of the study and had
instead been diagnosed with disorders such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. “One of the big
stories here is that there are people out there who are misdiagnosed. We just can’t find them,” Piven
says.
A 2012 study found, for example, that about 10 percent of adult patients in a state psychiatric hospital
have undiagnosed autism1.
Of the 20 men in Piven’s group, 17 look older than their age, with a stooped posture, and about half
have at least one symptom associated with Parkinson’s disease, including tremors, slow movement
and rigid gait. About one-quarter of the group has two or more of these symptoms.
One of the men was already undergoing treatment for Parkinson’s disease, and the researchers
referred two more for therapy. This is a possible prevalence of 3 in 20, which is much higher than the
1 in 1,000 rate of Parkinson’s in the general population, notes Piven.
“One of the big stories here is that there
are people out there who are
misdiagnosed. We just can’t find them.”

However, the results are preliminary, he cautions, and may be affected by the men’s medical history.
Drugs for epilepsy, which commonly co-occurs with autism, can cause motor deterioration, for
example.
Lord notes that many older adults with autism have spent time in institutions, where they might have
received strong courses of drugs.
Motor deficits are also a common feature among children with autism, says Stewart Mostofsky,
director of the Laboratory for Neurocognitive and Imaging Research at the Kennedy Krieger Institute
in Baltimore, who was not involved in the study. Slow movement and rigid gait are more common
than tremors, he says.
“It’s certainly possible that at least some of these features were present for many, many years, and
possibly even in childhood,” Mostofsky says.
There may also be an underlying genetic overlap between autism and Parkinson’s disease, says
Emanuel DiCicco-Bloom, professor of neuroscience at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School at
Rutgers University in New Jersey. A family of chemical messengers called monoamine
neurotransmitters, which include serotonin and dopamine, are implicated in both disorders.
Health registry:

Piven and his colleagues are collecting detailed life histories for each of the participants, aiming to
understand how the disorder manifests throughout a lifetime. In contrast, Croen’s study began with
medical records to find and study a large number of adults with autism. She and her colleagues found
2,108 adults with autism enrolled in Kaiser Permanente.
They compared these adults — about 1,000 of them are over 30, and 300 are over 50 — with ten times
as many controls matched for age and sex.
Overall, the adults with autism are more than twice as likely as controls to have depression, anxiety or

bipolar disorder, and to attempt suicide, the study found. They are also more likely to have diabetes,
gastrointestinal disorders, epilepsy, sleep disorders and high blood pressure.
Interestingly, only the women with autism have a higher chance of having immune disorders than
controls do. The rate of cancer is the about the same as in controls, despite the overlap between some
autism and cancer genes.
People with autism are also half as likely as controls to use alcohol and to smoke, the researchers
found. “The smoking [finding] is quite interesting,” says Lord. This may be because smoking and
drinking are social activities and people with autism are less susceptible to peer pressure, she says.
Although health registries are rich with information, Piven warns against relying solely on their
diagnosis of autism, which is based on insurance codes. When trying to find adults with autism in
North Carolina, his team quickly found 20 people through a health registry — but later discovered that
they had a form of dementia that leads to social deficits.
These individuals were diagnosed with autism only after their dementia set in, he says. “I think when
you dig into these databases, you’re going to find all this crazy stuff.”
For more reports from the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research, please click here.
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation
References:

1: Mandell D.S. et al. Autism 16, 557-567 (2012) PubMed

Autism-linked chromosomal region regulates brain size
Jessica Wright

16 May 2014

The genes in 16p11.2, the autism-linked region on chromosome 16, may
directly affect brain size early in development, according to
unpublished research presented Thursday at the 2014 International
Meeting for Autism Research in Atlanta.
Deletion of the region, which leads to autism in about 20 percent of
people, results in enlarged brain size, a feature often seen in autism.
The duplication results in an equivalent reduction in brain size.
The 16p11.2 region is a 600-kilobase stretch that encompasses 29 genes.
About 1 percent of people with autism have a duplication or deletion, or
copy number variant (CNV), of this region. Although only some people
with the CNV have autism, all have psychiatric and neurological
symptoms.

Growth area: Children with a
deletion of the 16p11.2 autismlinked region have increased
surface area in the outer folds
of their brains.

To unravel the importance of 16p11.2 in neurological disorders,
researchers are thoroughly characterizing individuals with the deletion
or duplication. So far, the project, dubbed the Simons Variation in
Individuals Project (Simons VIP), has evaluated 113 people with a
deletion and 107 with a duplication in the region. (The Simons VIP is
funded by the Simons Foundation, SFARI.org’s parent organization.)

One arm of this venture is using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to
scan the brains of all participants who are older than 8 years and can
tolerate brain imaging. The researchers presented results Thursday from 17 adults, 19 to 54 years of
age, with a duplication and 25 children, 8 to 17 years of age, with a deletion. They compared these data
with those from 33 and 29 age-matched controls, respectively. Four of the children with a deletion
and one adult with a duplication have autism.
The deletion boosts overall brain size by 9 percent, whereas the duplication decreases it by the same
amount, the study found. This change is seen consistently across all brain regions, with almost
symmetrical changes from the duplication and deletion in each case. For example, the amygdala is
about 3 percent larger in children with the deletion and 3 percent smaller in adults with the
duplication.
Interestingly, the changes in brain size are also present in brain regions that form early in
development, such as the thalamus, brainstem and cerebellum. This suggests that 16p11.2 may be
involved in early embryonic development, says Abid Qureshi, a postdoctoral associate in Randy
Buckner’s lab at Harvard University.

Similarly, changes to the cortex suggest an early developmental role for 16p11.2. The cortex is the
outermost layer of the brain, and is involved in most higher-order cognitive functions. As the cortex
forms during fetal development, it first folds upon itself, building a large surface area. General
thickening of the area tends to take place later.
Most of the brain size changes in the cortex were the result of alterations to the surface area, not
volume, the researchers found. In children with the deletion, about 90 percent of the increase can be
attributed to more surface area whereas in adults, roughly 80 percent of the decrease is the result of a
smaller surface area.
For more reports from the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research, please click here.
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.

Distinct differences mark male, female autism brains
Jessica Wright

20 May 2014

Male and female preschoolers with autism have
distinct sets of brain regions that distinguish them
from typically developing controls, according to
unpublished research presented Saturday at the 2014
International Meeting for Autism Research in Atlanta.

Julia Yellow
Brain protection: Some brain regions that
distinguish girls with autism may be linked to their
ability to compensate for their problems.

The findings suggest that differences in brain
structure may underlie autism’s gender bias. The
disorder is four times more common in males than it
is in females. Girls with autism tend to have more
autism-linked mutations than do boys with the
disorder. This has led some researchers to suggest that
girls are somehow protected from autism, and need a
heavier mutational burden than boys do to develop
the disorder.

The data presented Saturday suggest that part of this
protection may originate from differences in brain
structure. Some of the brain regions that differ
between girls with autism and female controls also
generally distinguish typical girls from typical boys. These changes to ‘female’ brain regions also seem
to track with the ability to adapt in girls with autism.
“These regions may not be associated with autism severity, but rather with some compensatory or
adaptive function,” says Christine Nordahl, assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of
California, Davis MIND Institute, who presented the results.
Nordahl and her colleagues scanned the brains of 22 girls with autism and 27 age-matched female
controls, as well as 134 boys with autism and 54 male controls. The researchers scanned the children
while they slept to assess their brain structures. The children were all about 3 years of age and have
similar intelligence quotients and autism severity.
The researchers divided the cortex — the outer layer of the brain, responsible for most higher-order
functions — into 68 regions. They looked for differences in the size of these regions between the
groups.
The boys and girls with autism each have brains that differ from those of their respective control
groups, with changes in regions relevant to autism. Surprisingly, however, the changes in boys with
autism are completely different from the changes in the girls with autism.
In girls, changes to the volume of the left superior temporal gyrus — a region critical for language

processing — are associated with greater autism severity. In boys, this is true for the left anterior
cingulate, which has been linked to empathy and emotion.
Although the results are preliminary, the researchers hypothesize that the brains of girls with autism
show evidence of compensatory mechanisms. Nordahl says she aims to recruit at least 90 more girls
to balance the number of males and females in the study.
For more reports from the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research, please click here.
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.

Takeaways from IMFAR 2014
Greg Boustead

22 May 2014

My final glass-elevator descent into the belly of the world’s second
largest atrium at Atlanta’s Marriott Marquis — site of this year’s
International Meeting for Autism Research (IMFAR) — gave me a
bird’s-eye view of the hotel staff as they broke down the poster stands
in the main conference hall.
The 50-floor trip also gave me a moment to reflect on some of the
major themes addressed over the past several days.
One trend that dominated the presentations was a propensity for
numbered lists. There were the five critical areas of focus Fred
Volkmar outlined, the ten things IMFAR Advocate of the Year winner
Peter Bell said researchers can do better, and the David
Letterman-style ‘Top ten ways to make it harder for us to give you
money,’ outlined by the Autism Science Foundation’s Alison Singer.
In this spirit, I offer my three quick takeaways from IMFAR 2014:
1. Autism is growing up:

Judging from the topic of Friday morning’s keynote address by Marsha Mailick, director of the
Waisman Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the new epidemiological data two sets of
researchers released on the health of adults with autism, and the focus of two of the conference’s
scientific panels, it seems evident that researchers are taking an increasingly closer look at adults with
autism.
“The biggest theme is adult outcomes,” Jeremy Veenstra-VanderWeele, associate professor of
psychiatry at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, said during our Twitter Q&A. “This year
is a coming out party for grownups.”
In another way, the field itself is growing up. The record turnout at this year’s conference and the
unprecedented amount of money going toward autism research underscores the field’s increasing
maturity.
Still, autism is a relatively new area of study. Yale University’s James McPartland put this in
perspective with his take on the conference: “It's amazing to think that, despite how much we have yet
to learn, everything we know about autism has been learned in a person’s lifetime.”
2. The future looks promising:

On Wednesday, a large portion of IMFAR’s approximately 500-strong student and postdoctoral
members assembled for a hands-on grant-writing workshop. After an overview of research priorities

by funding agencies, groups of students were matched with senior investigators to fine-tune grant
proposals and get candid feedback.
An oft-emphasized priority of this year’s meeting was to engage early-career autism researchers and
connect them with quality mentorship opportunities.
“The enthusiasm and passion of the students here is an inspiration,” Francesca Happé, president of
the International Society for Autism Research, tweeted during our Q&A chat.
The organizers suggest that the workshop will be a permanent and perhaps expanded fixture of the
IMFAR program in future years.
3. Scientists get social:

On Friday afternoon, we hosted a Twitter Q&A chat as a way to
generate an open dialogue among researchers, clinicians and
stakeholders about the current state of autism research and how
to move it forward.
According to Keyhole, an analytics service that tracks social
media statistics, the chat involved more than 1,300 posts
appearing in the feeds of more than 300,000 Twitter users.
Singer suggested that the biggest breakthrough of the meeting
was, perhaps, “dozens of scientists, on Twitter chat,
communicating directly with public."
A full transcript of the discussion can be found here, and I’ve highlighted a handful of threads from
the chat below.
Twitter Q&A summary:

What are the most important autism findings that came out this year?
William Mandy, University College London: “In terms of diagnosis, the Huerta et al. study
did a lot to calm fears about the impact of DSM-5.”
Peter Bell, Eden Autism Services: “I'm most encouraged to see more attention being devoted
to adult services and lifespan issues of those living with autism.”
Pamela Feliciano, SFARI: “I am really interested in all of the work that EU-AIMS is doing to
promote viable objective clinical trial outcome measures.”
John Elder Robison, author of Look Me in the Eye: “I am happy to see more of the
research focused on the deliverable end of the range, as opposed to basic research. Basic science is
good but we need to always deliver value to our community if we want to build their support.”
How can advocacy groups contribute to autism research and what can researchers learn from
stakeholders?
James McPartland, Yale Child Study Center: “Stakeholders can guide our priorities and
help us understand what matters to those living with ASD.”

Michael Rosanoff, Autism Speaks: “Common theme of IMFAR 2014: individuals, parents and
communities must be partners — not subjects — in autism research.”
Feliciano: “We need science communicators to help dispel myths. Parents’ first question to me
should not be about vaccines.”
Kevin Pelphrey, Yale Child Study Center: “I consult with a person with autism every day.
Very helpful, and keeps me honest.”
What do think is the best emerging biomarker that could identify subgroups of autism?
McPartland: “Integrating multimodal biomarkers — EEG, eye-tracking, fMRI — is key for
identifying subgroups.”
Jeremy Veenstra-VanderWeele, Vanderbilt University: “We need to start looking at the
edges of distributions, rather than total ASD versus control comparisons.”
Mandy: “Weak central coherence [is] not a biomarker, but a cognitive endophenotype that may
delineate a subgroup.”
Robison: “We have to be careful with biomarkers; the same marker could portend crushing
disability or eccentric geekiness. How to tell?”
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released new numbers estimating that 1 in 68 have
autism. What do you tell people when they ask about an 'epidemic'?
Chris Gunter, Marcus Autism Center: “I get asked about 'epidemic' very often. I explain that
our diagnosis and ascertainment has continued to improve over time.”
Mandy: “I think the expectations we place on children's social skills and behavior continue to rise
— which means more get labeled.”
Pelphrey: “I tell them an epidemic is 'a widespread occurrence of an infectious disease in a
community at a particular time.'”
Robison: “The rising autism prevalence numbers show that we are a formerly invisible army,
emerging into the light.”
How can we address the shortage of brain tissue donated from people with autism, and how might
such tissue help research?
David Amaral, MIND Institute at the University of California, Davis: “We need
ambassadors to spread the word that lack of donated postmortem brain is holding up progress.
Help us!”
Francesca Happé, King's College London: “We'll look back and laugh to think we hoped to
understand ASD with so few brain samples. Great new initiative.”
What kind of autism research would you like to see this coming year?
Veenstra-VanderWeele: “Continuing trend for research that carefully studies defined
subgroups that may respond to treatments.”
Happé: “I want to know whether the women with ASD who fly 'under the radar' are coping or
suffering in silence.”

Pelphrey: “Test claims of early indicators in a population sample to have a better sense of true
predictive value.”
Robison: “Most studies are still focused on failures. It's worth researching how to develop our
strengths.”
Like us on Facebook » | Follow us on Twitter @SFARIorg » | Join our newsletter »
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.

Reactions from IMFAR 2014
Greg Boustead

16 May 2014

We checked in from Atlanta, Georgia, where the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research ran
14-17 May. Read below for daily posts about the conference and initial reactions from the attendees.
17 May 2014: Final Morning

Saturday brought the lone purely genetics-focused oral session of the conference, with new work
suggesting that one of autism's strongest risk genes may lead to the discovery of a large set of more
‘high-confidence’ risk genes. Our on-site reporter, Jessica Wright, covered the finding here, along with
many other breaking reports from the conference, all of which can be found in our IMFAR 2014
section.
Overall, this year packed an ambitious agenda into a precious two-and-a-half day window. Hats off to
the organizers for making key adjustments to the program format. For instance, tweaking the timing
of the poster sessions (and adding a cash bar!) to make them more social and interactive proved a
much-appreciated change, according to the attendees I spoke with. Similarly, the early-career
workshop was a real hit with both the trainees and mentors who participated.
See reactions from attendees below, and you can find my final meeting wrap-up here.
16 May 2014: Day Two

David Mandell
Director, Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
Good news, bad news: “This morning’s keynote by Marsha Mailick was both
depressing and inspiring. Her finding that adults show such great decline in middle age,
on average, is depressing. On the other hand, it was exciting and surprising to see that symptom
profile continues to change in adulthood.”
Not just children: “This suggests continued brain plasticity during this period and speaks to the
urgent need to develop interventions and community supports for this group with the same intensity
and rigor that we apply to interventions for young children. Particularly striking was that adults in

structured day settings, including jobs, showed continued reductions in autism symptoms.”
David Skuse
Chair, Behavioural and Brain Sciences, University College London
Diagnosis as guide: “So far, a highlight for me was the panel organized by Eric
London, on ‘Characterising autism: a re-examination of the diagnosis and the phenotype.’
London suggested adoption of a meta-structure of neurodevelopmental disorders where
the ‘disorders’ are characterized in multidimensional terms. The diagnosis of autism should be seen as
a tool to inform clinical and educational decision-making, rather than a phenotype that reflects a valid
disorder with a discrete biological substrate.”
Patient view: “With regard to the discussion of the National Institutes of Health's Research Domain
Criteria (RDoC), specifically, Ann Wagner said that diagnostic categories such as autism spectrum
disorder were never intended to reflect biological reality. But there was a concern expressed by others
that as the biological processes envisaged by the RDoC project may take decades to be elucidated,
what are the likely benefits to patients of the project going to be in the meantime?”
James McPartland
Director, Yale Developmental Disabilities Clinic
So far: "Marsha Mailick opened her outstanding keynote by reflecting on the fact that
the 8-year-olds in Leo Kanner's original study would now be 79 on average. It's
amazing to think that, despite how much we have yet to learn, everything we know
about autism has been learned in a person’s lifetime. Not bad."
Road ahead: "Marsha's talk also highlighted a few key targets for progress. Given the evidence that
successful vocational experience predicts behavioral improvement, the attrition of women from
vocational settings must be addressed. Why are women more likely to participate for fewer hours over
time? The poorer trajectory for lower-income families transitioning out of high school makes clear the
need for more publicly funded services at this transition."
15 May 2014: Day One

Helen Tager-Flusberg
Director, Research on Autism & Developmental Disorders, Boston University
Machine diagnosing: “One really provocative presentation today was by Colleen
Chen and her colleagues at San Diego State University on using resting-state
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to predict autism classification.
They used data from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE)— a
collaborative database — which allowed them to analyze data using very cool
machine-learning algorithms from large numbers of participants with autism and
age-matched controls. Their analysis looked at connectivity between regions of interest, and this
approach led to over 90 percent correct classification, which is pretty impressive!”
Surprising connections: “Of greatest interest to me was the fact that the connections that were
most significant in the prediction algorithm involved somatosensory and motor regions and the
default network, even though we might have expected that social regions would have also been
significant predictors. This new approach to fMRI data from people with autism, made possible by the
ABIDE data repository, allowed the researchers to begin analyses based on much larger sample sizes

than we have seen before.”
Joseph Piven
Professor of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina School of Medicine; Director
of the Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities,
Euro-vision: “Of all I heard today, what stood out was the keynote of Declan
Murphy. What I found so inspiring was the level of organization and cooperation in
Europe between multiple (14!) academic centers, Autism Speaks and industry under
the umbrellas of the Innovative Medicines Initiative and the EU-AIMS project. I think
this is extraordinary and what will be required to launch the various pipelines of translational
research — from cells to services — that are our best hope to move forward with effective treatments.
Back home: “The follow-up experiment? I think we need to figure out how to raise the level of
interdisciplinary collaboration in the U.S.”
Catherine Lord
Director, Center for Autism and the Developing Brain, Weill Cornell Medical College,
Columbia University
Pointed questions: “I attended a very good session today (Gesture, Speech and
Social Communication) that addressed many aspects of communication in children
with autism and raised fascinating questions about which aspects of communication
are inherently entwined or linked with each other or other factors — for example,
general intelligence and social motivation — and which represent separate systems. New findings
presented during the session show that the use of pointing gestures — but not other gestures —
predicts acquisition of vocabulary, and that deaf children with autism use fewer person-related but
not object-related pointing gestures.”
Hand to mouth: “Such results, coupled with other associations discussed, between heart rate
variability when listening to speech and later language development in autism, suggest that we need to
consider different pathways to language development and delays.”
14 May 2014: Live Twitter chat from #IMFAR2014 on Friday

On Friday, 16 May, at 2 p.m. Eastern, we'll host a moderated Q&A via Twitter,
live from the floors of the 2014 International Meeting for Autism Research in Atlanta.
The chat will appear on @SFARIorg with the hashtag #IMFARchat.
The discussion will gather key researchers, stakeholders and journalists at the
conference and from around the world to react to some of the major themes and open
questions that emerge during the meeting.
Some of the participants confirmed to join us so far include Francesca Happé, president of the
International Society for Autism Research; Kevin Pelphrey, director of the Child Study Center at Yale
University School of Medicine; Alison Singer, president of the Autism Science Foundation; David
Amaral, director of research at the MIND Institute at the University of California, Davis; leading
members of the research and advocacy organization Autism Speaks and many more.
To join the conversation, log into Twitter at the scheduled time and follow @SFARIorg and hashtag
#IMFARchat. If you prefer more of a chat-room experience, you can also participate in the

#IMFARchat discussion room found here.
13 May 2014: Heading to Atlanta

Tomorrow night kicks off the 13th International Meeting for Autism Research (IMFAR), with an
opening reception among beluga whales and bottlenose dolphins at the Georgia Aquarium in
downtown Atlanta.
As far as autism meetings go, IMFAR is the biggest — this year it will host more than 1,500 experts
from 40 countries. It’s also unique in that it brings basic researchers, clinicians and advocacy groups
under one roof — key for a diverse and complex disorder such as autism.
This year’s agenda includes an early-career workshop, as well as daily ‘Meet the Experts’ luncheons for
students and trainees — all part of the conference’s growing focus on young researchers.
A buzzing metropolis and deep-fried cuisine replace the quaint seaside
hills and bar pintxosof San Sebastián, Spain (home of last year’s IMFAR),
as the conference returns to the U.S.
Atlanta makes sense as a host city for the conference. Apart from being a
research hub, it is also home to one of three national Autism Centers of
Excellence, a consortium of interdisciplinary laboratories focused on
investigating the disorder.
Here on SFARI.org, you can expect regular breaking news coverage and
analysis of noteworthy findings presented at the meeting. Keep up to date
here.
And watch this space for daily reactions from speakers and attendees at the meeting. As we did last
year, we’ll highlight a range of initial perspectives from the conference floor.
On Friday, we’ll host a live Twitter Q&A to reflect on some of the major themes and open questions
that emerge during the meeting. The discussion will include, among others, Francesca Happé,
president of the International Society for Autism Research.
The chat will take place at 2 p.m. Eastern on 16 May. Find us on Twitter at @SFARIorg and follow
along using hashtag #IMFARchat. (I’ll post further details on other participants tomorrow.)
Like us on Facebook » | Follow us on Twitter @SFARIorg » | Join our newsletter »
News and Opinion articles on SFARI.org are editorially independent of the Simons
Foundation.

