bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Intrinsic Areal Organization in the Individual Brain: Unique and Reliable

Ting Xu1,2,3, Alexander Opitz2,3, R. Cameron Craddock2,3, Xi-Nian Zuo1, Michael P. Milham2,3*
1

Key Laboratory of Behavioral Sciences and Magnetic Resonance Imaging Research Center, Institute

of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101; 2Center for the Developing Brain, Child
Mind Institute, New York, NY 10022; 3Center for Biomedical Imaging and Neuromodulation, Nathan
Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY 10962;

Corresponding authors:
Michael P. Milham, M.D., Ph.D.
Center for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute
445 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10022
E-mail: Michael.Milham@childmind.org

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract:
Resting state fMRI (R-fMRI) is a powerful in-vivo tool for examining the functional architecture of the
human brain. Recent studies have demonstrated the ability to characterize transitions between
functionally distinct cortical areas through the mapping of gradients in intrinsic functional connectivity
(iFC) profiles. To date, this novel approach has primarily been applied to iFC profiles averaged across
groups of individuals, or in one case, a single individual scanned multiple times. Here, we used a
publically available R-fMRI dataset, in which 30 healthy participants were scanned 10 times (10
minutes per session), to investigate differences in full-brain transition profiles (i.e., gradient maps, edge
maps) across individuals, and their reliability. Despite similarities, we found individual-specific variations
in transition zone properties, which were repeatable over time. Reliability of individual-specific
variations increased with number of time points; however, even with only 10 minutes, individuals were
nearly always distinguishable from one another. Higher-order networks exhibited greater betweenindividual variation for transition profiles, while sensory and motor networks exhibited greater withinindividual variation. The gradients defined using alternative iFC measures revealed similar but distinct
gradient profiles for each. These results illustrate the utility of gradient-based iFC approaches for
studying inter-individual variation in brain function.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION

The delineation of functional brain units, commonly referred to as cortical areas (Van Essen and
Glasser 2014), is a fundamental challenge in neuroscience. Central to such efforts, is the determination
of areas of transition from one cortical area to the next. Pioneering efforts used a combination of
histological, cytoarchitectural, and myeloarchitectural examinations (Brodmann 1909; Vogt and Vogt
1919; Felleman and Van Essen 1991; Zilles and Amunts 2010), along with lesion studies, to
differentiate neighboring cortical territories with respect to their architectonic, connectivity, functional
and topographic properties (Felleman and Van Essen 1991; Cohen et al. 2008) Converging evidence
supports the notion that the boundaries between areas are generally sharp rather than gradual (Kaas
1987; Amunts and Zilles 2012). A well-defined example is the primary visual area (V1), which is clearly
different and sharply separated in cell bodies from the second visual cortex (V2) (Sincich and Horton
2005; Buckner and Yeo 2014). Given that these measurements are mainly based on non-human
primates, postmortem examinations, or invasive recording experiments, the development of methods
capable of mapping cortical areas in vivo remains an active area of research.
Recently, Cohen et al. (2008) demonstrated the ability to map transitions between nearby cortical areas
through the detection of spatial variation (i.e., gradients) in intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) profiles
estimated from resting-state fMRI (R-fMRI). A number of successful applications have emerged. At the
local level, studies have delineated transition zones between cortical areas within key regions of
interest (e.g., cingulate cortex, left lateral parietal cortex, and inferior frontal cortex) (Cohen et al. 2008;
Nelson et al. 2010; Hirose et al. 2013; Hirose et al., 2012). At the whole brain level, Wig et al. (2014)
demonstrated the feasibility of delineating the broader range of boundaries between cortical areas in a
single analysis based upon their gradient properties. Overall, these various studies have consistently
recapitulated fine-grained cortical boundaries (e.g. between V1 and V2) previously established using
histological and cytoarchitectural methodologies (Buckner and Yeo 2014). Additionally, recent studies
demonstrated group-level transition-zone patterns to be highly reproducible across independent

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

samples and studies (Gordon et al. 2014; Wig et al. 2014), thereby increasing enthusiasm about the
approach.
However, with few exceptions (e.g., Cohen et al. 2008; Wig et al. 2013; Laumann et al. 2015), studies
focused on detecting transition zones and cortical area boundaries have primarily relied on data
averaged across dozens of individuals, or pooled individual-level maps to achieve more robust findings
(e.g., Yeo et al. 2011; Kelly et al. 2012; Wig et al. 2014). Although effective in reducing noise, this is
problematic, as a growing literature has suggested the presence of meaningful inter-individual variation
in iFC patterns (Mueller et al. 2013), which appear to be stable over time and can be related to
differences in behavior (e.g., Finn et al. 2015). Individual differences in areal organization are thought to
be particularly prominent in higher-order association areas – a finding that is consistent with models
suggesting the evolutionary value of cortical expansion (Mueller et al. 2013). Recent studies have
suggested the potential importance of inter-individual variation in the transition zones or boundaries
between cortical areas detected using iFC, by relating it to differences in task-evoked activation
(Mennes et al. 2010) as well as variation in behaviorally quantifiable traits, such as social reciprocity
and personality (Di Martino et al. 2009; Adelstein et al. 2011).
Recent work has underscored the feasibility of using iFC-based approaches to capture areal
topographies at the individual level. First, Gordon et al. (2015) characterized the areal topological
features at the individual-level, demonstrating that the areal sizes and the position of transition zones
varied across individuals. Second, Laumann et al. (2015) mapped functional areal boundaries
throughout the brain in a single human subject using a highly sampled dataset (>900 min). The
individual-level architecture was broadly reflective of the universal architecture revealed in group-level
analyses (Biswal et al. 2010; Wig et al. 2014), though with distinct variations that were fine-grained.
Importantly, the areal organization was highly repeatable with subsets of data in this single subject rich
dataset, suggesting that multiple scanning is not a prerequisite for appreciating inter-individual
variation.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Here, we evaluated the reliability of inter-individual differences in transition-zones properties revealed
by iFC-based mapping approaches (i.e., the gradients measured, and the boundaries drawn between
functional areas delineated using them). Accordingly, in the present work we: 1) estimated the intraand inter-individual variability of functional gradients and boundaries detected from 300 datasets which
contain 30 participants who were scanned 10 times within one month; 2) evaluated the convergence of
gradients and boundaries in both within- and between-individual perspective; 3) evaluated the testretest reliability based on sufficient data from common sequence (TR=2000ms, 50 min) and fast
multiband sequence (TR=645, 10 min); 4) examined the potential source of the variability of functional
transition zones by separating intra- and inter-individual variability.
Of note, while initial work has based the determination of gradients and boundaries based upon a
summary index for iFC, a multitude of alternative indices could be used. As such, additional analyses in
the present work explore the similarities and distinctions among findings obtained using alternative iFC
indices for the definition of gradients. Finally, we validated that the transitions and boundaries are not
derived by the underlying structural architecture by comparing the results from real data to those from
random data.

METHODS
Data acquisition
Two collections of data from the publicly available Consortium for Reliability and Reproducibility data
sharing repository (CoRR: http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/CoRR/html/data_citation.html) (Zuo et
al. 2014) were used for the analysis. The first collection (HNU) consists of 300 resting state fMRI scans,
collected from 30 healthy participants (15 males, age = 24 ± 2.41 years) who were each scanned every
three days for a month (10 sessions per individual, (Chen, Xu et al. accepted)). Data were acquired at
the Center for Cognition and Brain Disorders at Hangzhou Normal University using a GE MR750 3
Tesla scanner (GE Medical Systems, Waukesha, WI). Each 10-minute R-fMRI scan was acquired using
a T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging sequence optimized for blood oxygenation level dependent

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(BOLD) contrast (EPI, TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 90°, acquisition matrix = 64 x 64, field of
view = 220 x 220 mm, in-plane resolution = 3.4 mm x 3.4 mm, 43 axial 3.4-mm thick slices). A highresolution structural image was also acquired at each scanning session using a T1-weighted Fast
Spoiled Gradient echo sequence (FSPGR, TE = 3.1 ms, TR = 8.1 ms, TI = 450 ms, flip angle = 8°, field
of view = 220 x 220 mm, resolution = 1 mm x 1 mm x 1 mm, 176 sagittal slices). The second collection
(eNKI) consists of data from 22 participants (16 males, age = 33 ± 12.24 years) who were each
scanned twice, 1 week apart, at the Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research (Nooner et al.
2012). Each session includes structural MRI (MPRAGE, TE = 2.52 ms, TR = 1900 ms, TI = 900 ms, flip
angle = 9°, resolution = 1 mm x 1 mm x 1 mm) and a 10-minute R-fMRI scan (multiband EPI, TE = 30
ms, TR = 645 ms, flip angle = 65°, acquisition matrix = 112 x 112, in-plane resolution = 3 mm x 3 mm,
64 axial 3-mm thick interleaved slices, number of measurements = 404, multiband factor = 4), which
were acquired on a Siemens 3T scanner with a 32 channel head coil. In both cases, foam padding was
used to minimize head motion. Participants were instructed to relax during the scan, remain still with
eyes open, fixate on a ‘+’ symbol, stay awake and not think about anything in particular. After the
scans, all participants were interviewed to confirm that none of them had fallen asleep. Data were
acquired with informed consent and in accordance with ethical committee review.
Image Preprocessing
All

data

were

processed

using

the

Connectome

Computation

System

(CCS)

(https://github.com/zuoxinian/CCS), which provides a platform for multimodal image analysis by
combining components of AFNI (Cox 1996), FSL (Smith et al. 2004; Jenkinson et al. 2012), FreeSurfer
(Dale et al. 1999; Fischl, Sereno, and Dale 1999), and SPM (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) with
various implementations of quality control, surface-based R-fMRI measures, reliability and
reproducibility assessments (Xu et al. 2015). Here we summarize the structural and functional steps as
follows.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Structural MRI preprocessing included spatial noise removal by a non-local mean filtering operation
(Xing et al. 2011; Zuo and Xing 2011), followed by brain extraction, tissue segmentation, and surface
reconstruction using FreeSurfer 5.1 (http://freesurfer.net/fswiki). Tissue segmentation resulted in gray
matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) masks for each hemisphere. For each
participant, triangular meshes representing white matter and pial surfaces were reconstructed by
tessellating the GM-WM and GM-CSF interfaces, and averaging to create a middle cortical surface
(Dale et al. 1999; Fischl, Sereno, and Dale 1999). The resulting white matter surface in native space
was inflated into a sphere for alignment to the fsaverage template by shape-based spherical
registration (Fischl, Sereno, Tootell, et al. 1999).
Functional preprocessing included: discarding the first five volumes of the R-fMRI time series and
storing all images as double precision floating point numbers (to reduce variability of outcomes across
operating systems, see Glatard et al. 2015), detecting and compressing temporal spikes (AFNI
3dDespike, similar to data scrubbing with interpolation as in Power et al. (2014b)), slice timing
correction (this was not performed for multiband images), motion correction, and 4D intensity
normalization to 10,000. Nuisance variable regression (Fox et al. 2005; Lund et al. 2006) was
performed to remove the contributions of WM, CSF, Friston’s 24 motion parameters (Friston et al.
1996; Yan et al. 2013), and linear and quadratic trends from the data. The time series residuals were
band-passed filtered (0.01-0.1 Hz) to restrict the signals to those frequencies previously implicated in
resting state functional connectivity (Biswal et al. 1995; Cordes et al. 2001). Functional images were coregistered to the native high-resolution anatomical images using 6-parameter boundary-based
registration (BBR) in FreeSurfer (Greve and Fischl 2009).
Computation of iFC metrics on native surface
There are several advantages for analyzing fMRI data on the surface rather than in volume space. A
cortical sheet provides a more accurate representation of the morphology and topology of brain
structure (Dale et al. 1999). It provides a more accurate registration between individual data and the
template surface (Van Essen 2004; Ghosh et al. 2010; Klein et al. 2010; Yeo et al. 2010). Also, it

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

enables the visualization of spatial relationships between brain regions in terms of their geodesic
distances along the cortical surface, which is more neurobiologically meaningful than 3D Euclidean
distance in volume space. In light of these putative benefits, all functional derivatives in the present
study were calculated on the surface. First, the volumetric fMRI data were aligned to anatomical space
using the BBR transformation matrix and then projected to their corresponding native middle cortical
surface (about 160k vertices for each hemisphere). To make the resolution comparable between the
volumetric and surface data, a coarser fsaverage5 template surface was used (the average triangle
edge length between adjacent vertices of fsaverage5 is about 3.5 mm) for computing functional metrics.
The transformation calculated during spherical registration was applied to the fsaverage5 template to
convert it into native space, and a standardized native surface, in which each node has a direct
correspondence with a node on the fsaverage5 surface, was calculated by interpolating the native
surface to the fsaverage5 template in native space.
A variety of functional connectivity metrics were used to capture different features of the cortex.
Consistent with previous studies of connectivity gradients, iFC similarity was measured by the spatial
similarity between whole brain functional connectivity maps calculated from a seed vertex and those
calculated from every other vertex’s time courses (Cohen et al. 2008; Wig et al. 2011, 2014).
Specifically, for each individual, the time course for each vertex was extracted and used to calculate a
whole brain functional connectivity profile that consists of 20,484 vertices (10,242 for each hemisphere)
of cerebral grey matter and 9,413 voxels in subcortical regions and the cerebellum. The distributions of
the resulting correlation values were standardized to the normal distribution using Fisher’s r-to-z
transform. An iFC similarity profile was calculated for each vertex on each surface from the spatial
correlation between the vertex’s iFC profile and the iFC profile of every other vertex, resulting in a
10,242 vertices x 10,242 vertices symmetric matrix. Each column (or row) of this matrix represents the
iFC similarity map for each surface vertex. Then these 10k iFC similarity maps were smoothed along
the native surface with a Gaussian Kernel (FWHM=8mm). The gradient (i.e., the first spatial derivative)
of each smoothed iFC similarity map was computed on the native middle surface to measure transitions

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in iFC profile across vertices, resulting in 10k gradient maps for each hemisphere. The details of the
gradient computation are described in the next section.
Beyond iFC similarity, we adopted three additional functional indices that capture local-, global- and
network-scale aspects of intrinsic brain function, respectively. Two-dimensional Regional Homogeneity
(2dReHo) was employed as a local-level measure of iFC that characterizes the temporal
synchronization of the BOLD signal within an area of the cortical mantle (Zang et al. 2004; Zuo et al.
2013; Jiang et al. 2014; Jiang and Zuo 2015). Degree centrality (DC) and eigenvector centrality (EC)
were employed as global-scale measures to capture features of functional connectivity as a whole (i.e.,
the functional connectome) (Bullmore and Sporns 2009; Rubinov and Sporns 2010; Zuo et al. 2012).
The network-scale measure of iFC was captured using a dual regression (DR) procedure to map 10
intrinsic connectivity networks defined from a meta-analysis of activations from the BrainAtlas database
(Smith et al. 2009). These networks including Medial Visual network (DR-MedVis), Occipital Visual
network (DR-OccVis), Lateral Visual network (DR-LatVis), Default Mode network (DR-DMN), Cerebellar
network (DR-Cerebellar), Sensorimotor network (DR-SenMot), Auditory network (DR-Audi), Executive
Control network (DR-Control), Left Frontoparietal network (DR-FrontalL), and Right Frontoparietaln
network (DR-FrontalR). Similarly, the gradients were calculated for each of the smoothed
(FWHM=8mm) iFC indices to detect abrupt changes of iFC features at local-, global, and networkscale.
Transition zones and boundaries
Gradients were calculated on the convoluted (i.e., not flattened) standardized native surface mesh,
followed by an edge detection procedure that sharpened the gradients to identify putative boundaries.
The initial framework for gradient- mapping follows the Canny edge detection procedure (Canny 1986)
and involves three steps: (1) each vertex’s iFC connectivity profile is smoothed with a 2D Gaussian
filter to reduce noise, (2) a gradient map is calculated for each vertex’s smoothed profile to identify
regions of rapidly changing IFC profiles, and (3) performing edge detection by finding local maxima in
the gradient maps. Cohen et al. (2008) first applied Canny edge detection to iFC similarity profiles

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

calculated from data projected onto flattened surfaces. Flattening the cortical surface requires it to be
cut in five places; findings associated with edges near these cuts are prone to artifact and are thus
difficult to interpret. To avoid this issue, Wig et al. (2013, 2014) extended the method to un-flattened
surfaces by performing all three steps (smoothing, gradient computation, edge detection) on the middle
cortical surface (mid-way between white matter and pial surfaces). The major challenge of this
approach is that the gradient calculation must account for the curvature of the cortical surface. This was
handled by calculating the gradient of each vertex on a plane perpendicular to the surface normal
vector

extending

from

that

vertex

(Caret

5.65

‘metric-gradient’

function

http://brainvis.wustl.edu/wiki/index.php/Caret:About). The gradient is calculated by solving a linear
model relating the geodesic distances between the vertex and it’s nearest neighbors to differences in
their image intensity. The magnitude of the resulting gradient is the change of image intensity per unit
distance. Here, the intensity image is a functional feature of the cortical surface described in the above
section, including iFC similarity, ReHo, DC, EC and DR-Networks. Finally, the edges were identified
from the resulting gradient maps using a non-maxima suppression procedure (Wig et al. 2014), which
labels a vertex as an edge if its gradient is larger than the gradients of at least two non-adjacent pairs of
its neighbors. Of note, the iFC similarity map of each vertex was used to calculate gradients and binary
edges, resulting in 10k gradient/edge maps for each hemisphere and then averaged across vertices to
yield the final mean gradient and edge density maps. For ReHo, DC, EC and DR-networks, in order to
build the similar edge density map, we generated alternative observations of the data using circular
block bootstrap (Bellec et al. 2010). The procedure utilized 100 bootstraps and a temporal block length
equal to the square root of the number of time points. The final edge density maps were calculated by
averaging 100 bootstrapped binary edge maps.
Estimating intra-, inter-individual variability and intra-class correlation
Intra- and inter-individual variability were simultaneously estimated using separate Linear Mixed Effects
Models (LMEs) for gradient and edge probability maps. The gradient or edge probability for a given

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

vertex v can be denoted as 𝑌!" (𝑣), where i indicates the participant and j represents the measurement
(for i=1, 2,…, 30 and j=1, 2).
𝑌!" 𝑣 =    𝜇!! 𝑣 + 𝛾!! 𝑣 + 𝑚𝑌!" + 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛𝐹𝐷!" + 𝑚𝑐𝐵𝐵𝑅!" + 𝑎𝑔𝑒! + 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟! + 𝐽𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑛! 𝑣 + 𝜖!" (𝑣)
In this model, 𝜇!! 𝑣 is a constant term that represents the intercept or fixed effect of group average in
gradient/edges at vertex v, while 𝛾!! 𝑣 is the random effect term for i-th participant at vertex v. Due to
the potential influence of various confounding factors to our final estimation, we included several
covariates in this mixed model at both session and individual level. At the session level j, the model
included three covariates: the mean frame-wise displacement (meanFDij) of head motion, minimum
cost of BBR (mcBBRij) and the global mean of gradient/edge across the whole brain within group mask
(𝑚𝑌!" ) for each participant i. At the individual level, agei, genderi and Jacobian determinant of the
spherical transformation (𝐽𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑛! 𝑣 at vertex v) were included for each participant i as well. The
model estimations were implemented using the lme function from the nlme R package (http://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/nlme). The variance estimation 𝜎!! of the random effect term 𝛾!! (𝑣) is the
inter-individual variance across all the participants, while the variance 𝜎!! of the residual 𝜖!" is the intraindividual variance for a single participant across all the sessions. Meanwhile, the intra-class correlation
(ICC) was calculated by dividing inter-individual variance to the sum of inter- and intra-individual
variance.
Surface geometry constraints testing
To determine whether transition zones and detected boundaries could have arisen from the surface
geometry, we replicated the boundary mapping analyses using surrogate data. Specifically, for each
participant, we replaced the preprocessed R-fMRI data with temporal Gaussian random data (mean =
0, standard deviation = 1, the same number of time points as the original data) in native functional
volume space. The surrogate data were then projected onto the participant’s native middle surface,
registered and down resampled to ‘fsaverage5’ version of native surface using the same co-registration

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and spherical registration transformation calculated during processing of the real data. The functional
derivatives (similarity of iFC, ReHo, centrality, and DR-Networks) were computed followed by gradient
computation and edge detection using the same procedure and registration transformations used for
the real data. The gradient and boundaries maps from this surrogate data were compared with the
results from real data to investigate whether surface geometry and registration errors would contribute
to the functional areal organization detected.

Results
High reproducibility of individual areal organization
For each of the 300 scans (30 participants, 10 sessions each) from the HNU data collection, a gradient
map and a corresponding edge map were generated. This was accomplished using the gradient-based
boundary mapping approach and iFC similarity measure specified by Wig et al. (2014), though at the
individual level. Specifically, for each individual, the maps generated were averages of those calculated
for each of the 20k vertices (10k per hemisphere). Prior to examining differences among participantspecific maps, individual level maps were averaged to generate a group-level gradient map that was
strikingly similar to those previously published by Wig et al. (2014) and Gordon et al. (2014) (Figure
1A). The group-level edge map was also very similar to those previously published, though somewhat
less sharp due to the fact that we calculated the edge maps on individual participants prior to
averaging, as opposed to group-average maps (e.g., Gordon et al. calculated an edge map for each
vertex using the group-level gradient map, and then averaged across edge maps). The latter approach
averages out the contributions of individual variation in the gradients prior to the generation of the edge
maps (see supplementary materials Figure S1 for a direct comparison of the two approaches from prior
methodological testing by our group using a different dataset (de Zubicaray et al. 2008)).
For both gradient maps and edge maps, we next investigated the similarity of the maps generated
across individuals and time (i.e., scan sessions). In order to accomplish this, we calculated the spatial
correlation between the 300 gradient maps generated (30 participants * 10 sessions), as well as

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

between the 300 edge maps. Figure 1B demonstrates the spatial correlation matrix obtained for
gradients (upper panel) and edge maps (lower panel). Regardless of participant, the correlations
between different scan sessions (gradient: mean r=0.571 (SD=0.107); edge: mean r=0.485
(SD=0.069)) are notably greater than those between participants (gradient: mean r=0.231 (SD=0.059);
edge: mean r=0.039 (SD=0.013)). To facilitate appreciation of this point, the correlation matrix is
ordered by participant (i.e., first ten rows belong to participant 1, second ten rows belong to participant
two, and so on). As can be seen in Figure 1C, the distribution of between-individual correlation scores
for gradient maps overlap minimally with that for within-individual; for edge maps, no overlap was
present. These findings suggest that the full-brain areal transition characteristics indexed by gradient
and edge measures are unique to each individual, and repeatable across scan sessions.
INSERT FIGURE 1. HERE
We replicated the general pattern of findings in another independent R-fMRI dataset (eNKI data
collection: 22 participants * 2 sessions，multiband EPI sequence TR=645ms). Specifically, we again
observed substantially higher within-individual correlations (gradient: mean r=0.599 (SD=0.132); edge:
mean r=0.435 (SD=0.093)) than between-individual correlations (gradient: mean r = 0.204 (SD=0.093);
edge: r=0.033 (SD=0.013)). We further examined whether the within-individual spatial correlations were
related to age, gender, head motion or the functional-to-structural co-registration. The distribution of
within- and between- individual spatial correlations for each individual was plotted in Figure S2. We did
not find any significant relationships between the mean or standard deviation of within-individual
correlations and the factors listed above.
Of note, we complemented the spatial correlation-based measures of repeatability with image intraclass correlation coefficient (I2C2), which takes into account within- and between-individual variability,
using a single measure (Shou et al. 2013). This index showed moderate reliability between any two
sessions in dataset1 (gradient: 0.43 (SD=0.04); edge: 0.47 (SD=0.02)) and in dataset2 (gradient: 0.52;

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

edge: 0.43). This may suggest that the specific areas of the gradient and edge maps that vary from one
participant to another are somewhat variable across sessions.
Data requirements for mapping inter-individual differences in areal organization
Recent work has emphasized the value of using longer data acquisitions (or combinations of shorter
ones) to increase the stability of estimates of functional connectivity. In particular, using a correlation
matrix based on 380 minutes of data from a single participant as a reference, recent work found that
estimates of the full-brain correlation matrix did not plateau in consistency (with respect to the
reference) until 27 minutes of data were included (Laumann et al. 2015). In the present work, we
attempted to further inform this issue by examining the stability of gradient and edge maps as data is
added in 10-minute increments. More specifically, first, for each participant, we randomly selected 5 of
the 10 sessions and used their data to derive reference gradient and edge maps. Then, for each
participant, we randomly selected samples of 10, 20, 30, and 40 minutes of data from the remaining
five 10-minute sessions, for spatial correlation with the same participant’s 50-minute reference image.
Regardless of whether 10, 20, 30, 40 or 50 minutes of data were used, the resultant gradient or edge
map for an individual consistently showed a higher spatial correlation with the reference map calculated
for the same participant, than with the reference map for any other participant. In other words, for all
participants, one could readily distinguish whether the map derived was properly matched with that
from the same participant as opposed to different participants. The distribution of the spatial
correlations to the reference gradient or edge map is demonstrated in Figure 2. Additionally, in figure 3,
we depict data from multiple 10-minute sessions, along with two 50-minute sessions for each of three
participants to provide illustrative examples of distinct patterns associated with each participant, as well
as their repeatability.
INSERT FIGURE 2. HERE
INSERT FIGURE 3. HERE
It is important to note that the consistency of findings obtained across the various quantities of data
should not be taken to infer that there are no differences. Consistent with predictions based upon prior

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

work, across participants, each 10-minute increment in data produced an incremental increase in the
mean correlation with the reference images – for both gradient and edge maps (Figure 2A). Focusing
first on gradient maps, we found that the average within-participant correlation between the map
generated from a single scan session (10 min, 295 time points) and an individual’s reference image
was r=0.66 (SD=0.08); this progressively increased to a high of r=0.82 (SD=0.06) when data from five
sessions (50 min, 1475 time points) was used (Figure 2B, upper). Statistical testing found that the
observed increase was significant for each 10-minute increment (p<0.001), except for the 20- to 30minute increment (p=0.167). For edge density, we found that the average within-participant correlation
between the map generated from a single scan session and an individuals’ reference image was r=0.53
(SD=0.06); this progressively increased to a high of r=0.63 (SD=0.05) with 50 min (1475 time points)
(Figure 2B, lower). Statistical testing found that increases in correlation for the increments of 20- to 30minute and 40- to 50-minute to be significant (p<0.001).
Within-and between-individual variability
It is generally accepted that anatomical components of higher order association areas tend to have
greater anatomical variability among individuals than those comprising lower-order sensory and motor
areas (Mueller et al. 2013). To gain similar insights into potential regional variation in areal organization,
we examined the within- and between-participant variation separately. Figure 4A and 4B depict the
percentage of the total variability that is the intra- vs. inter-individual variability (after accounting for that
attributable to nuisance signals) for each, gradient maps and edge maps. Intra-individual variability
indexes the temporal stability of transition scores within participant while inter-individual variability
indexes the stability of transition scores across the participants. Both intra- and inter-individual
variability demonstrated a non-uniform distribution across brain regions. For both gradients and edges,
between-individual differences were largest in high-order association cortex including the lateral
prefrontal lobe, lateral parietal lobe, and around the border of the PCC-precuneus default mode
networks, while lower in sensory-motor cortices and medial occipital visual cortices. Within-individual
variability depicted the complementary pattern from inter-individual variance, with the maximal variation

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of gradient and edges being noted within sensory-motor and visual regions. Regions within the defaultmode network demonstrated a moderate level of within-individual variability.
INSERT FIGURE 4. HERE
To provide a network-level perspective of intra-individual variations in gradient and edge densities we
made use of the confidence maps for the 7 networks in Yeo et al. (2011). Specifically, the standard
variations were averaged at network borders (defined as confidence <0.3 along the network borders)
and within network region (defined as confidence >= 0.3 within each network). Without exceptions, the
between-individual differences contributed more than half of the variance in transitions at the border
region of 7 networks (Figure 4C). However, the 53% variability within somatomotor network was
attributed to within-individual variation rather than between-individual differences (Figure 4C),
suggesting the spatial iFC profile were more state dependent than the other networks. This finding is
consistent with that of Mennes et al. (2010), Craddock et al. (2013), and Laumann et al. (2015).
Transition pattern based on local-, global-, and network-scale iFC
Previous studies using stimulus-based functional neuroimaging methods have suggested that areal
discrimination maps could vary depending on the specific property or properties used in their definition,
e.g. angular and eccentricity representation maps for distinct areas of early visual cortex (Buckner and
Yeo 2014)(Buckner and Yeo 2014)(Buckner and Yeo 2014)(Buckner and Yeo 2014)(Wandell and
Winawer 2011; Buckner and Yeo 2014). Here, we examined whether transition patterns are dependent
upon the specific intrinsic brain measure used for their definition. Specifically, we repeated our analyses
focused on the definition of gradient and edge maps using commonly examined measures in the
literature (i.e., ReHo, DC, EC, and DR-Networks). Reminiscent of the finding for iFC-similarity above,
for all the functional metrics, gradient (and edge) maps calculated from different sessions in the same
individual exhibited a consistently higher amount of spatial correlation with one another than those from
differing individuals (Figure 5). However, with the exceptions of ReHo, DR-DMN, and DR-FrontoL, the
spatial correlation of gradient and edge maps generated in different sessions for an individual were
generally lower than iFC similarity. Across measures, it appeared that those measures characterized by

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a higher between-participant correlation in gradient or edge maps, typically exhibited a higher withinindividual correlation (i.e., repeatability) over time. Given that the gradient of iFC similarity was
averaged from 20k gradient maps across vertices, this may in part reflect the cleaning of data within an
individual by averaging.
INSERT FIGURE 5. HERE
Regarding the convergence of transition patterns among gradients, Figure 6 demonstrates the average
pair-wise correlations between all functional metrics (50 min reference subsets). Among all the metrics,
the centrality maps (DC and EC) showed the most remarkably similar transition scores (r=0.94).
Gradients of iFC similarity exhibited low correlation with ReHo (mean r=0.09, SD=0.047) but had
notable correlations with DC (mean r=0.32, SD=0.164), EC (mean r=0.46, SD=0.160), DR-medVis
(mean r=0.31, SD=0.132), DR-occVis (mean r=0.29, SD=0.115), DR-LatVis (mean r=0.43, SD=0.125),
DR-DMN (mean r=0.57, SD=0.109), DR-Cerebral (mean r=0.31, SD=0.116), DR-SenMot (mean r=0.61,
SD=0.093), DR-Auditory (r=0.56, SD=0.120), DR-Control (r=0.42, SD=0.126), Dr-FrontL (r=0.43,
SD=0.082), and DR-FrontR (mean r=0.46, SD=0.102). These findings are more reflective of global- and
network-level iFC characteristics, than local features (Figure 6). The Kendall Coefficient of gradients for
all the functional indices was 0.27, SD=0.04. Similar finding were observed for edges (Figure S4).
INSERT FIGURE 6. HERE

Vertex-wise reliability of transition zone properties
While our analyses primarily focused on full-brain transition patterns, we did take the opportunity to
provide insights into the test-retest reliability of vertex-based gradient and edge map scores.
Specifically, we calculated vertex-wise intra-class correlation coefficients for each, gradients and edges,
using the two 50-min subsets. Gradients in iFC similarity showed considerably high reliability across
cortex, especially in PCC-DMN, LP-DMN, and frontoparietal association cortex (Figure 7). The pattern
was more apparent in reliability of edge maps (Figure S5). Intriguingly, highly reliable edges were found
around the border of PCC-DMN, LP-DMN, and the frontoparietal regions, which were observed as a

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

common transition zones in variant iFC metrics. Among different functional indices, ReHo exhibited the
highest ICC in transition scores. The intra- and inter-individual variation analysis confirmed that high
ICC of ReHo was due to the considerably small amount of intra-individual variation. For DR networks,
the ICC of gradient and edge scores showed non-uniform spatial distribution in different networks. The
vertex-wise ICC of gradient/edges scores obtained for a given DR network tended exceptionally high
when looking at vertices that were part of the network. Notably, the between-individual differences of
transitions were consistently small in somatomotor and primary visual cortex across most of networks.
The similar findings were replicated in dataset2 (10 min, fast sequence) (Figure S6).
INSERT FIGURE 7. HERE

Effect of Surface Geometry and surface registration
A potential concern regarding the methodologies presented is that the underlying surface geometry
may influence the presence and locations of estimated gradients and edges. To test for this, we
repeated our gradient-based analyses using surrogate fMRI data that consisted exclusively of white
Gaussian noise. Figure 8A-B summarizes the spatial correlation of iFC similarity and its gradient
between real and random data (ordered by participants and scan sessions, real to random). For the
surrogate data, within-participant spatial correlations were again higher than between participant spatial
correlations. However, spatial correlations of gradients between maps derived from real and surrogate
R-fMRI showed a relatively low degree of correlation – even for the same participant (gradient: mean
r=0.07, SD = 0.04). These findings suggest that the surface geometry explained only as much as 1% of
variance in the gradient of iFC similarity. Thus, while inter-individual variations in the surface geometry
in and of themselves can produce repeatable gradients, they are unrelated to findings observed with
functional data. Although beyond the scope of the present work, preliminary analyses suggest that the
strength of the findings obtained for surrogate data is largely attributable to inter-individual variations in
the distance between adjacent neighbors, which impacts gradient computation (Figure 8C).
INSERT FIGURE 8. HERE

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

As a final sanity check, we repeated our edge detection analyses using the similarity of iFC maps rather
than gradient maps. Spatial correlations between sessions (for the same participant) were quite low –
again, reinforcing the validity of the findings obtained in our primary analyses.

DISCUSSION
The present work demonstrated the ability of gradient-based iFC boundary mapping approaches
(Cohen et al. 2008; Wig et al. 2013, 2014; Gordon et al. 2014, 2015; Laumann et al. 2015) to reliably
characterize inter-individual variation in the transitional properties of cortical areas throughout the brain.
Using a publically available serial test-retest dataset, we demonstrated that despite similarities across
participants, individual-specific variations in transition zone properties (i.e., gradients, edges) exist,
which are repeatable over time (i.e., across 10 sessions). Consistent with the suggestions of prior work,
we found that the reliability of individual-specific variations increases with the number of time points
(i.e., scan time). However, even with only 10 minutes, individuals were able to be consistently
distinguished from one another (i.e., spatial correlation between any two sessions from the same
individual was consistently greater than that observed between participants). Within-participant
variation in transition zone properties appeared to be greater in lower order networks than higher order,
while between-individual variation was greater in higher order networks; these findings are consistent
with those of prior efforts examining iFC profiles. Finally, the present work extended prior work by
employing alternative iFC measures to define gradients, revealing similar but distinct gradient profiles
for each of the iFC features – all of which exhibited impressive repeatability over time. Importantly, the
various findings obtained in the present work did not appear to be related to potential sources of
artifactual variation, such as head-motion or surface registration. As such, our findings increase
confidence in the potential for gradient measures to be used as a novel feature upon which interindividual differences in brain function can be mapped and eventually related to phenotypic variation.
Individual Level Areal Organization Are Reliable Yet Unique

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Long focused on the comparison of groupings of individuals that differ on one or more features (e.g.,
diagnostic status), the delineation of inter-individual variation has emerged as a central focus in
emerging neuroscientific and clinical agendas (e.g., biomarker identification). Several studies have
emphasized the potential utility of taking variations in cortical area transition zone properties into
account when attempting to catalog phenotypic variation (e.g., Di Martino et al. 2009; Adelstein et al.
2011). Our analyses revealed full-brain transition patterns on an individual basis, which were
repeatable over time and distinguished participants from one another. Findings that the topological
architecture differs between participants are consistent with recent work highlighting inter-individual
variation in key features of the topological architecture (e.g. area size and shape) (Gordon et al. 2015).
Perhaps more exciting, were findings that full-brain gradient and edge maps can distinguish nearly all
individuals using only 10 minutes of data (1B, Figure 5). This finding echoes recent work by Finn et al.
(2015), which suggested the potential for full-brain characterizations of the intrinsic brain to ‘fingerprint’
individuals (Finn et al. 2015) – a capability that is highly encouraging for efforts towards biomarker
discovery. Although not a focus of the present work, confirmatory analyses replacing actual functional
data with random noise were able to demonstrate the fingerprinting abilities of structural brain
properties embedded in the cortical surface as well. Importantly, these structural fingerprints were
largely unrelated to the various indices derived from true functional data. Taken together with prior
work, it appears that future work may find potential value in the development of fingerprinting profiles.
Sources of Within- and Between-individual Variability in Areal Organization
A growing number of studies are appreciating regional and network-level differences in the stability of
connectivity patterns across individuals and time, which can be informative to our understanding of
brain development and function. Intra-individual variability characterizes the temporal stability of
transitional zone properties for cortical areas (i.e., low variation infers high stability), while interindividual variability captures the conservation of these zones from one person to the next (i.e., low
variation infers conservation). Intra- and inter-individual variability of transitions in iFC features were not
uniformly distributed across the cortex in the present work. Specifically, multimodal association

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

networks (e.g., default, dorsal attention, and executive control) exhibited greater variability between
individuals than within; in contrast, unimodal networks (e.g., visual, sensorimotor) were found to have
lower inter-individual variability whilst high intra-individual variability. These results echoed previous
findings highlighting greater intra-individual variation in lower-order networks (e.g. Mennes et al. 2010;
Craddock et al. 2013), whose functional interactions are more heavily influenced by current task
demands (Mennes et al. 2010). Similarly, they echo the findings of studies suggesting greater interindividual variation in higher order networks (Mueller et al. 2013; Wang and Liu 2014; Langs et al. 2015;
Laumann et al. 2015), which appear to be more affected by genetic and environmental factors
(Anderson and Finlay 2014; Gao et al. 2014). The greater susceptibility of higher order multimodal
association networks to environmental influences is not surprising given their more protracted
developmental period relative to unimodal (Mueller et al. 2013; Zilles and Amunts 2013). Additionally,
the later evolutionary development and enlargement of association cortices supporting higher-order
network function may contribute in part to our findings of increased variation (i.e., decreased
conservation) across individuals (Van Essen and Dierker 2007; Brun et al. 2009; Van Essen et al. 2012;
Chan et al. 2014).
Potential confounds that can arise in consideration of inter-individual variation in functional transition
zones come from differences in cortical folding patterns (Hill et al. 2010). For example, sulcal depth can
exhibit patterns of inter-individual variation that are similar to those observed in iFC (Mueller et al.
2013). Additionally, given that current surface-registration algorithms are based on the anatomical
curvature, the cross-individual registration could lead to non-uniform misalignment across cortex,
thereby contributing to individual variability into functional transitions (Robinson et al. 2014). In the
present study, we explored these potential confounds through the replacement of functional MRI data
with random noise. The underlying anatomical architecture had only a slight relationship on functional
transition profile of iFC features (Figure 8B), reaffirming confidence that our findings are driven by iFC.
Different Functional Features Shows Similar but Distinct Areal Transition Profiles

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Recent years have witnessed the emergence of a growing number of R-fMRI measures, each capturing
a unique aspect of the intrinsic functional architecture. The distinctions among some indices can be
readily delineated based upon differences in their definitions (e.g., centrality measures) or the networks
being examined (e.g., dual regression components); while for others, the exact positioning of one
measure relative to another can be more challenging (e.g., fALFF, VMHC, ReHo). While the iFC
similarity measure employed for initial gradient-based mapping efforts has several desirable features
(e.g., simplicity, ability to overcome noise through averaging within individual, utility for full-brain
parcellation), it is only one unique feature of the intrinsic brain. It can be argued that studies would likely
benefit from selection of their measures based upon the specific question or purpose at hand. For
example, if the question is specifically about the left fronto-parietal network, then dual-regression may
be preferable. Alternatively, more exploratory approaches may derive benefit from the calculation of
multiple features for each cortical area simultaneously (e.g., fALFF, ReHo, VMHC, DC), providing
gradient profiles which can be employed for analyses.
Among the functional indices examined in the present work, the gradients derived from ReHo (an index
of local synchrony) were the most reliable, followed by similarity of iFC. Relative to other measures,
these two are unique in that they involve averaged values, which may engender some degree of noise
reduction. While the number of values being averaged into the ReHo score for a given vertex are
dramatically fewer than those that go into the same vertex’s similarity of iFC, the values being averaged
are inherently more similar to one another. Additionally, it is worth noting that ReHo is consistently
noted to engender a high degree of reliability as a measure, which may in turn lend to its more reliable
gradients (Chen, Xu et al. accepted; Jiang and Zuo 2015). It may be worth noting that ReHo relies on
the non-parametric Kendall’s Concordance Coefficient rather than Pearson’s Correlation, which may
also be a contributing factor (Zuo et al. 2013). Regarding similarity of iFC, two observations are worth
noting. First, that the most closely related function indices were the dual regression components for the
default and sensorimotor networks, which are most similar to the task-negative and task-positive
networks defined by Fox et al. (2005). Second, those gradients found to be highly reliable for similarity

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of iFC, tended to have reliability across the other R-fMRI indices as well. These findings suggest
summary measures (e.g., similarity of iFC) have clear strengths, though may have limitations with
respect to their sensitivity to findings outside the cardinal large-scale networks (e.g., task-positive, tasknegative).
Limitations and future directions
There are several limitations in the currently study. First, R-fMRI scans did not cover the whole brain for
all the participants, particularly in the inferior temporal and orbital frontal cortex; as such, our ability to
map transition profiles for these areas was limited. This reduced coverage could have impacted our
findings for the DR-auditory network, though we do not believe to a high degree. Second, while several
studies have demonstrated that the areal transition profile based on R-fMRI correspond to the tasks
activation (Wig et al. 2013; Laumann et al. 2015), the present work is limited in its ability to make
generalizations regarding transition zone repeatability beyond R-fMRI; future serial scanning efforts
would benefit from the inclusion of task fMRI as well. If the areal transition profile from task and rest are
reliable, it may facilitate alignment across participants by offering spatial functional variability
information to registration progress (Robinson et al. 2014). Finally, the current findings of reliable
transition profile are based on datasets sampling a one-month period; future work may investigate the
dynamic changes of areal organization across more extended periods of time, as well as address
questions regarding potential age-related differences across the lifespan.

Conclusions
In sum, the present work demonstrates the ability to map repeatable, individual-specific areal transition
profiles for an array of iFC features, confirming their potential for fingerprinting and biomarker
discovery. Points of convergence were noted in the cortical area transition zones defined using differing
iFC indices. However, the distinctiveness of the full-brain transition zones profiles obtained using
differing iFC indices suggests the merits of considering multiple indices to provide a more
comprehensive characterization of cortical area transition zone properties.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Funds of International Exchange for Post-doctoral Scientists of China
(2013), grants from the NIH (NIMH U01MH099059 to M.P.M.; NIMH BRAINS R01-MH101555 to
R.C.C.), the Natural Science Foundation of China (81270023, 81278412, 81171409, 81000583,
81471740, 81220108014), the National Science Foundation for Post-doctoral Scientists of China (No.
2013M530073), the Key Research Program and the Hundred Talents Program of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences (KSZD-EW-TZ-002, X.N.Z), as well as gifts from Phyllis Green, Randolph Cowen
and Joseph Healey to M.P.M.. All of the authors declare no conflict of interest. We would like to thank
Margaret Wright, Katie McMahon, Greig de Zubicaray, and Ian Hickie, who provided the data from the
Australian Twin Study (R01HD050735). We also thank Evan Gordon and Timothy Laumann for
valuable discussions on surface-based gradient computation.

Reference
Adelstein JS, Shehzad Z, Mennes M, Deyoung CG, Zuo X-N, Kelly C, Margulies DS, Bloomfield A,
Gray JR, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. 2011. Personality is reflected in the brain’s intrinsic
functional architecture. PLoS One. 6:e27633.
Amunts K, Zilles K. 2012. Architecture and organizational principles of Broca’s region. Trends Cogn
Sci. 16:418–426.
Anderson ML, Finlay BL. 2014. Allocating structure to function: the strong links between neuroplasticity
and natural selection. Front Hum Neurosci. 7:918.
Bellec P, Rosa-Neto P, Lyttelton OC, Benali H, Evans AC. 2010. Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable
clusters in resting-state fMRI. Neuroimage. 51:1126–1139.
Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS. 1995. Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of
resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn Reson Med. 34:537–541.
Biswal BB, Mennes M, Zuo X-N, Gohel S, Kelly C, Smith SM, Beckmann CF, Adelstein JS, Buckner
RL, Colcombe S, Dogonowski A-M, Ernst M, Fair D, Hampson M, Hoptman MJ, Hyde JS,
Kiviniemi VJ, Kötter R, Li S-J, Lin C-P, Lowe MJ, Mackay C, Madden DJ, Madsen KH, Margulies
DS, Mayberg HS, McMahon K, Monk CS, Mostofsky SH, Nagel BJ, Pekar JJ, Peltier SJ, Petersen
SE, Riedl V, Rombouts SARB, Rypma B, Schlaggar BL, Schmidt S, Seidler RD, Siegle GJ, Sorg
C, Teng G-J, Veijola J, Villringer A, Walter M, Wang L, Weng X-C, Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Williamson

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

P, Windischberger C, Zang Y-F, Zhang H-Y, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. 2010. Toward discovery
science of human brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 107:4734–4739.
Brodmann K. 1909. Brodmann’s Localisation in the Cerebral Cortex.
Brun CC, Leporé N, Pennec X, Lee AD, Barysheva M, Madsen SK, Avedissian C, Chou Y-Y, de
Zubicaray GI, McMahon KL, Wright MJ, Toga AW, Thompson PM. 2009. Mapping the regional
influence of genetics on brain structure variability--a tensor-based morphometry study.
Neuroimage. 48:37–49.
Buckner RL, Yeo BTT. 2014. Borders, map clusters, and supra-areal organization in visual cortex.
Neuroimage. 93:292–297.
Bullmore E, Sporns O. 2009. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and
functional systems. Nat Rev Neurosci. 10:186–198.
Canny J. 1986. A Computational Approach to Edge Detection. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell.
PAMI-8:679–698.
Chan MY, Park DC, Savalia NK, Petersen SE, Wig GS. 2014. Decreased segregation of brain systems
across the healthy adult lifespan. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 111:E4997–E5006.
Chen B, Xu T, Zhou Z, Wang L, Yang N, Wang Z, Dong H-M, Yang Z, Zang Y-F, Zuo X-N, Weng X-C.
n.d. Intra-/Inter-Individual Variability and Test-Retest Reliability Revealed by Ten Repeated
Resting-State Brain Scans Over One Month. PLoS One.
Cohen AL, Fair D a., Dosenbach NUF, Miezin FM, Dierker D, Van Essen DC, Schlaggar BL, Petersen
SE. 2008. Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity
MRI. Neuroimage. 41:45–57.
Cordes D, Haughton VM, Arfanakis K, Carew JD, Turski PA, Moritz CH, Quigley MA, Meyerand ME.
2001. Frequencies Contributing to Functional Connectivity in the Cerebral Cortex in “Resting-state”
Data. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 22:1326–1333.
Cox RW. 1996. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance
neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res. 29:162–173.
Craddock RC, James GA, Holtzheimer PE, Hu XP, Mayberg HS. 2012. A whole brain fMRI atlas
generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering. Hum Brain Mapp. 33:1914–1928.
Craddock RC, Milham MP, LaConte SM. 2013. Predicting intrinsic brain activity. Neuroimage. 82:127–
136.
Dale AM, Fischl B, Sereno MI. 1999. Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface
reconstruction. Neuroimage. 9:179–194.
de Zubicaray GI, Chiang M-C, McMahon KL, Shattuck DW, Toga AW, Martin NG, Wright MJ,
Thompson PM. 2008. Meeting the Challenges of Neuroimaging Genetics. Brain Imaging Behav.
2:258–263.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Di Martino A, Shehzad Z, Kelly C, Roy AK, Gee DG, Uddin LQ, Gotimer K, Klein DF, Castellanos FX,
Milham MP. 2009. Relationship between cingulo-insular functional connectivity and autistic traits in
neurotypical adults. Am J Psychiatry. 166:891–899.
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC. 1991. Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex.
Cereb Cortex. 1:1–47.
Finn ES, Shen X, Scheinost D, Rosenberg MD, Huang J, Chun MM, Papademetris X, Constable RT.
2015. Functional connectome fingerprinting: identifying individuals using patterns of brain
connectivity. Nat Neurosci. 1–11.
Fischl B, Sereno MI, Dale AM. 1999. Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening, and a
surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage. 9:195–207.
Fischl B, Sereno MI, Tootell RB, Dale a M. 1999. High-resolution intersubject averaging and a
coordinate system for the cortical surface. Hum Brain Mapp. 8:272–284.
Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Corbetta M, Van Essen DC, Raichle ME. 2005. The human brain is
intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
102:9673–9678.
Friston KJ, Williams S, Howard R, Frackowiak RS, Turner R. 1996. Movement-related effects in fMRI
time-series. Magn Reson Med. 35:346–355.
Gao W, Elton A, Zhu H, Alcauter S, Smith JK, Gilmore JH, Lin W. 2014. Intersubject Variability of and
Genetic Effects on the Brain’s Functional Connectivity during Infancy. J Neurosci. 34:11288–
11296.
Ghosh SS, Kakunoori S, Augustinack J, Nieto-Castanon A, Kovelman I, Gaab N, Christodoulou JA,
Triantafyllou C, Gabrieli JDE, Fischl B. 2010. Evaluating the validity of volume-based and surfacebased brain image registration for developmental cognitive neuroscience studies in children 4 to
11 years of age. Neuroimage. 53:85–93.
Glatard T, Lewis LB, Ferreira da Silva R, Adalat R, Beck N, Lepage C, Rioux P, Rousseau M-E, Sherif
T, Deelman E, Khalili-Mahani N, Evans AC. 2015. Reproducibility of neuroimaging analyses
across operating systems. Front Neuroinform. 9:12.
Gordon EM, Laumann TO, Adeyemo B, Huckins JF, Kelley WM, Petersen SE. 2014. Generation and
Evaluation of a Cortical Area Parcellation from Resting-State Correlations. Cereb Cortex. bhu239.
Gordon EM, Laumann TO, Adeyemo B, Petersen SE. 2015. Individual Variability of the System-Level
Organization of the Human Brain. Cereb cortex. bhv239.
Greve DN, Fischl B. 2009. Accurate and robust brain image alignment using boundary-based
registration. Neuroimage. 48:63–72.
Hill J, Inder T, Neil J, Dierker D, Harwell J, Van Essen D. 2010. Similar patterns of cortical expansion
during human development and evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 107:13135–13140.
Hirose S, Watanabe T, Wada H, Imai Y, Machida T, Shirouzu I, Miyashita Y, Konishi S. 2013.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Functional Relevance of Micromodules in the Human Association Cortex Delineated with HighResolution fMRI. Cereb Cortex. 23:2863–2871.
Jenkinson M, Beckmann CF, Behrens TEJ, Woolrich MW, Smith SM. 2012. FSL. Neuroimage. 62:782–
790.
Jiang L, Xu T, He Y, Hou X-H, Wang J, Cao X-Y, Wei G-X, Yang Z, He Y, Zuo X-N. 2014. Toward
neurobiological characterization of functional homogeneity in the human cortex: regional variation,
morphological association and functional covariance network organization. Brain Struct Funct.
Jiang L-L, Zuo X-N. 2015. Understanding regional homogeneity as a multi-modal, multi-scale
neuroimaging marker of the human brain connectome. Neurosci.
Kaas JH. 1987. The organization of neocortex in mammals: implications for theories of brain function.
Annu Rev Psychol. 38:129–151.
Kelly C, Toro R, Di Martino A, Cox CL, Bellec P, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. 2012. A convergent
functional architecture of the insula emerges across imaging modalities. Neuroimage. 61:1129–
1142.
Klein A, Ghosh SS, Avants B, Yeo BTT, Fischl B, Ardekani B, Gee JC, Mann JJ, Parsey R V. 2010.
Evaluation of volume-based and surface-based brain image registration methods. Neuroimage.
51:214–220.
Langs G, Wang D, Golland P, Mueller S, Pan R, Sabuncu MR, Sun W, Li K, Liu H. 2015. Identifying
Shared Brain Networks in Individuals by Decoupling Functional and Anatomical Variability. 1–11.
Laumann TO, Gordon EM, Adeyemo B, Snyder AZ, Joo SJ, Chen M-Y, Gilmore AW, McDermott KB,
Nelson SM, Dosenbach NUF, Schlaggar BL, Mumford JA, Poldrack RA, Petersen SE. 2015.
Functional System and Areal Organization of a Highly Sampled Individual Human Brain Highlights.
Neuron.
Lund TE, Madsen KH, Sidaros K, Luo W-L, Nichols TE. 2006. Non-white noise in fMRI: does modelling
have an impact? Neuroimage. 29:54–66.
Mennes M, Kelly C, Zuo X-N, Di Martino A, Biswal BB, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. 2010. Interindividual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity.
Neuroimage. 50:1690–1701.
Mueller S, Wang D, Fox MD, Yeo BTT, Sepulcre J, Sabuncu MR, Shafee R, Lu J, Liu H. 2013.
Individual variability in functional connectivity architecture of the human brain. Neuron. 77:586–
595.
Nelson SM, Cohen AL, Power JD, Wig GS, Miezin FM, Wheeler ME, Velanova K, Donaldson DI,
Phillips JS, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. 2010. A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal
cortex. Neuron. 67:156–170.
Nooner KB, Colcombe SJ, Tobe RH, Mennes M, Benedict MM, Moreno AL, Panek LJ, Brown S, Zavitz
ST, Li Q, Sikka S, Gutman D, Bangaru S, Schlachter RT, Kamiel SM, Anwar AR, Hinz CM, Kaplan

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

MS, Rachlin AB, Adelsberg S, Cheung B, Khanuja R, Yan C, Craddock CC, Calhoun V, Courtney
W, King M, Wood D, Cox CL, Kelly AMC, Di Martino A, Petkova E, Reiss PT, Duan N, Thomsen D,
Biswal B, Coffey B, Hoptman MJ, Javitt DC, Pomara N, Sidtis JJ, Koplewicz HS, Castellanos FX,
Leventhal BL, Milham MP. 2012. The NKI-Rockland Sample: A Model for Accelerating the Pace of
Discovery Science in Psychiatry. Front Neurosci. 6:152.
Power JD, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. 2014. Recent progress and outstanding issues in motion
correction in resting state fMRI. Neuroimage. 105:536–551.
Robinson EC, Jbabdi S, Glasser MF, Andersson J, Burgess GC, Harms MP, Smith SM, Van Essen DC,
Jenkinson M. 2014. MSM: a new flexible framework for Multimodal Surface Matching.
Neuroimage. 100:414–426.
Rubinov M, Sporns O. 2010. Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and
interpretations. Neuroimage. 52:1059–1069.
Shou H, Eloyan A, Lee S, Zipunnikov V, Crainiceanu AN, Nebel NB, Caffo B, Lindquist MA,
Crainiceanu CM. 2013. Quantifying the reliability of image replication studies: the image intraclass
correlation coefficient (I2C2). Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 13:714–724.
Sincich LC, Horton JC. 2005. The circuitry of V1 and V2: integration of color, form, and motion. Annu
Rev Neurosci. 28:303–326.
Smith SM, Fox PT, Miller KL, Glahn DC, Fox PM, Mackay CE, Filippini N, Watkins KE, Toro R, Laird a.
R, Beckmann CF. 2009. Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation
and rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 106:13040–13045.
Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Woolrich MW, Beckmann CF, Behrens TEJ, Johansen-Berg H, Bannister PR,
De Luca M, Drobnjak I, Flitney DE, Niazy RK, Saunders J, Vickers J, Zhang Y, De Stefano N,
Brady JM, Matthews PM. 2004. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and
implementation as FSL. Neuroimage. 23 Suppl 1:S208–S219.
Van Essen DC. 2004. Surface-based approaches to spatial localization and registration in primate
cerebral cortex. Neuroimage. 23 Suppl 1:S97–S107.
Van Essen DC, Dierker D. 2007. On navigating the human cerebral cortex: Response to “in praise of
tedious anatomy.” Neuroimage. 37:1050–1054.
Van Essen DC, Glasser MF. 2014. In vivo architectonics: a cortico-centric perspective. Neuroimage. 93
Pt 2:157–164.
Van Essen DC, Glasser MF, Dierker DL, Harwell J. 2012. Cortical parcellations of the macaque
monkey analyzed on surface-based atlases. Cereb Cortex. 22:2227–2240.
Vogt C, Vogt O. 1919. Allgemeinere Ergebnisse unserer Hirnforschung. J Psychol Neurol. 292–398.
Wandell B a, Winawer J. 2011. Imaging retinotopic maps in the human brain. Vision Res. 51:718–737.
Wang D, Liu H. 2014. Functional Connectivity Architecture of the Human Brain: Not All the Same.
Neurosci. 20:432–438.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Wig GS, Laumann TO, Cohen AL, Power JD, Nelson SM, Glasser MF, Miezin FM, Snyder AZ,
Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. 2013. Parcellating an Individual Subject’s Cortical and Subcortical
Brain Structures Using Snowball Sampling of Resting-State Correlations. Cereb Cortex. 2036–
2054.
Wig GS, Laumann TO, Petersen SE. 2014. An approach for parcellating human cortical areas using
resting-state correlations. Neuroimage. 93:276–291.
Wig GS, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. 2011. Concepts and principles in the analysis of brain networks.
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1224:126–146.
Xing X-X, Zhou Y-L, Adelstein JS, Zuo X-N. 2011. PDE-based spatial smoothing: a practical
demonstration of impacts on MRI brain extraction, tissue segmentation and registration. Magn
Reson Imaging. 29:731–738.
Xu T, Yang Z, Jiang L, Xing X-X, Zuo X-N. 2015. A Connectome Computation System for discovery
science of brain. Sci Bull. 60:86–95.
Yan C-G, Cheung B, Kelly C, Colcombe S, Craddock RC, Di Martino A, Li Q, Zuo X-N, Castellanos FX,
Milham MP. 2013. A comprehensive assessment of regional variation in the impact of head
micromovements on functional connectomics. Neuroimage. 76:183–201.
Yeo BTT, Krienen FM, Sepulcre J, Sabuncu MR, Lashkari D, Hollinshead M, Roffman JL, Smoller JW,
Zöllei L, Polimeni JR, Fischl B, Liu H, Buckner RL. 2011. The organization of the human cerebral
cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol. 106:1125–1165.
Yeo BTT, Sabuncu MR, Vercauteren T, Ayache N, Fischl B, Golland P. 2010. Spherical demons: fast
diffeomorphic landmark-free surface registration. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 29:650–668.
Zang Y-F, Jiang T-Z, Lu Y-L, He Y, Tian L-X. 2004. Regional homogeneity approach to fMRI data
analysis. Neuroimage. 22:394–400.
Zilles K, Amunts K. 2010. Centenary of Brodmann’s map — conception and fate. Nat Rev Neurosci.
11:139–145.
Zilles K, Amunts K. 2013. Individual variability is not noise. Trends Cogn Sci. 17:153–155.
Zuo X-N, Anderson JS, Bellec P, Birn RM, Biswal BB, Blautzik J, Breitner JC., Buckner RL, Calhoun
VD, Castellanos FX, Chen A, Chen B, Chen J, Chen X, Colcombe SJ, Courtney W, Craddock RC,
Di Martino A, Dong H-M, Fu X, Gong Q, Gorgolewski KJ, Han Y, He Y, He Y, Ho E, Holmes A,
Hou X-H, Huckins J, Jiang T, Jiang Y, Kelley W, Kelly C, King M, LaConte SM, Lainhart JE, Lei X,
Li H-J, Li K, Li K, Lin Q, Liu D, Liu J, Liu X, Liu Y, Lu G, Lu J, Luna B, Luo J, Lurie D, Mao Y,
Margulies DS, Mayer AR, Meindl T, Meyerand ME, Nan W, Nielsen J a, O’Connor D, Paulsen D,
Prabhakaran V, Qi Z, Qiu J, Shao C, Shehzad Z, Tang W, Villringer A, Wang H, Wang K, Wei D,
Wei G-X, Weng X-C, Wu X, Xu T, Yang N, Yang Z, Zang Y-F, Zhang L, Zhang Q, Zhang Z, Zhang
Z, Zhao K, Zhen Z, Zhou Y, Zhu X-T, Milham MP. 2014. An open science resource for establishing
reliability and reproducibility in functional connectomics. Sci Data. 1:140049.
Zuo X-N, Ehmke R, Mennes M, Imperati D, Castellanos FX, Sporns O, Milham MP. 2012. Network

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

centrality in the human functional connectome. Cereb Cortex. 22:1862–1875.
Zuo X-N, Xing X-X. 2011. Effects of non-local diffusion on structural MRI preprocessing and default
network mapping: statistical comparisons with isotropic/anisotropic diffusion. PLoS One. 6:e26703.
Zuo X-N, Xu T, Jiang L, Yang Z, Cao X-Y, He Y, Zang Y-F, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. 2013. Toward
reliable characterization of functional homogeneity in the human brain: preprocessing, scan
duration, imaging resolution and computational space. Neuroimage. 65:374–386.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Individual areal organization is unique to each individual and highly repeatable across scan
sessions. A: Group-level gradient and edge density maps for iFC similarity. The individual maps were
calculated on the standardized ‘fsaverage5’ version of native surface for each individual, then averaged
and visualized here on the ‘fsaverage5’ template surface. B: Between-scan spatial correlation matrices
for the gradient (top) and edge density (bottom) maps derived from the 300 datasets (30 participants *
10 sessions); the rows/columns of the matrix are ordered by participant (i.e., first ten rows are sessions
1 to 10 for participant one, second ten rows are sessions 1 to 10 for participant two and so on; total
number of participants = 30). C: Distribution of between-scan spatial correlations (from Figure 1B).
Black dots are the within-individual (i.e., same participant, different sessions) correlations for gradient
(top) and edge density maps (down), while the grey dots are between-individual correlations (i.e.,
different participants, same session, or different participants, different sessions).

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. The stability of individual gradient and edge maps as a function of the amount of data used for
gradient estimation. A: Each dotted-line represents a different participant; the spatial correlation
between maps generated from each incremental amount of data (10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 minutes) and
those from the remaining 50 minutes session data (reference) are depicted (top: gradient; bottom: edge
density). Red dots are the mean correlation across participants at each data subsets B: The distribution
of within-individual correlations (black dots) and between-individual correlations (grey dots) at selected
data subsets to the 50-minutes references for each individuals.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Examples of gradient of iFC similarity in 3 individual participants. Left three columns are
gradients from three sessions and right two columns are gradients from two 50-minutes subsets. To
facilitate comparison, for each participant we mark off (using colored boxes) an example of a feature
that differs across participants and is relatively consistent within individual.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Within- and between-individual variability for gradient and edge density maps based on iFC
similarity. A: The percentage of within individual variation (relative to total variation) in gradients (top)
and edge density (down) scores (based on IFC similarity) across sessions; B: The percentage of
between individual variation in gradient (top) and edge density (down) scores (based on iFC similarity);
C: Within- and between- individual variation (standard deviation) at network borders (defined as
confidence <0.3 along the network borders) and within network region (defined as confidence >= 0.3
within each network). The limbic network was not included here due to the substantial signal loss in
temporal areas.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. Between-scan spatial correlations for gradients based on 14 different function indices. Black
dots are within-individual correlations between two 50-minutes subsets for each individual, while grey
dots are correlations between two subsets from different individuals.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Group-level gradient maps for each functional metric from two 50-minutes subsets. For each
participant, we calculated the spatial correlation matrix between the gradient maps for the various
functional metrics, and then averaged across individuals to provide the matrix depicted here.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7. The gradient-based intra-class correlation maps for the 14 functional metrics are depicted
here (ICC was calculated between two 50-minute subsets of data generated through random selection
[without replacement]). The distribution of ICC for gradient maps for each functional metric is shown in
the bottom-left corner.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 12, 2016; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/035790. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 8. Effect of surface geometry and surface registration. A: The spatial correlations matrix of mean
iFC similarity from real and random data. B: The spatial correlations matrix of mean gradient in iFC
similarity from real and random data. The correlation matrixes are ordered by participant: top left submatrix is from real data (first ten rows for ten sessions of participant 1, second ten rows for ten sessions
of participant 2, and so on) and bottom right sub-matrix is from random data in the same order. C: The
2D histogram depicting the relationship between cortical area and mean gradients of iFC similarity
computed from random data.

