The organization of the human cerebellum estimated
by intrinsic functional connectivity

Randy L. Buckner, Fenna M. Krienen, Angela Castellanos, Julio C. Diaz and B. T.
Thomas Yeo
J Neurophysiol 106:2322-2345, 2011. First published 27 July 2011; doi:10.1152/jn.00339.2011
You might find this additional info useful...
This article cites 105 articles, 39 of which can be accessed free at:
http://jn.physiology.org/content/106/5/2322.full.html#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 other HighWire hosted articles
Focal Pontine Lesions Provide Evidence That Intrinsic Functional Connectivity Reflects
Polysynaptic Anatomical Pathways
Jie Lu, Hesheng Liu, Miao Zhang, Danhong Wang, Yanxiang Cao, Qingfeng Ma, Dongdong
Rong, Xiaoyi Wang, Randy L. Buckner and Kuncheng Li
J. Neurosci., October 19, 2011; 31 (42): 15065-15071.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

Additional material and information about Journal of Neurophysiology can be found at:
http://www.the-aps.org/publications/jn

This infomation is current as of November 20, 2011.

Journal of Neurophysiology publishes original articles on the function of the nervous system. It is published 12 times a year
(monthly) by the American Physiological Society, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD 20814-3991. Copyright © 2011 by the
American Physiological Society. ISSN: 0022-3077, ESSN: 1522-1598. Visit our website at http://www.the-aps.org/.

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Updated information and services including high resolution figures, can be found at:
http://jn.physiology.org/content/106/5/2322.full.html

J Neurophysiol 106: 2322–2345, 2011.
First published July 27, 2011; doi:10.1152/jn.00339.2011.

The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic
functional connectivity
Randy L. Buckner,1,2,3,4 Fenna M. Krienen,2,4 Angela Castellanos,1,2 Julio C. Diaz,1,5
and B. T. Thomas Yeo2,4
1
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge; 2Center for Brain Science, Department of Psychology, Harvard University,
Cambridge; 3Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; 4Athinoula A. Martinos Center
for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts;
and 5Department of Biology, University of Miami, Miami, Florida

Submitted 13 April 2011; accepted in final form 20 July 2011

tralateral cerebellar cortex (the pontocerebellar tract). Afferent
projections first synapse in the deep cerebellar nuclei (e.g.,
dentate nucleus) and then project to a second synapse in the
contralateral thalamus that in turn serves as a relay to the
cerebral cortex (the dentatothalamocortical tract). There are no
monosynaptic connections between the cerebrum and cerebellum. As a result, traditional anterograde and retrograde tracing
techniques cannot be used to explore the relation between
cerebral topography and the cerebellum. Insights into cerebellar organization require physiological and transneuronal tracing techniques, inferences from deficits following lesions, and
functional neuroimaging studies.
Somatomotor Topography in the Cerebellum

has been the topic of
debate for more than a century (Manni and Petrosini 2004).
Although there is agreement that the cerebellum contains
multiple somatomotor representations, a challenging feature of
cerebellar anatomy prevents resolving its complete organization: the cerebellum is connected to the cerebral cortex only by
way of polysynaptic circuits (Evarts and Thach 1969; Kemp
and Powell 1971; Schmahmann and Pandya 1997a; Strick
1985). Efferent projections from the cerebrum synapse initially
in the pontine nuclei and then project primarily to the con-

Early electrophysiological studies revealed that the cerebellum possesses multiple topographically organized somatomotor1 representations (Adrian 1943; Snider and Sowell 1944).
An inverted somatomotor map is present in the anterior lobe,
and a second posterior map is upright, forming an inversion
between the anterior and posterior representations. Evidence
directly demonstrating that cerebral motor areas are anatomically connected to specific regions of the cerebellum came with
the development of transneuronal tracing techniques. Transneuronal tracing techniques use virus strains that selectively
spread through retrograde or anterograde infection of synaptically connected neurons (HSV1; Middleton and Strick 1994,
2001; rabies virus; Kelly and Strick 2003). With the use of
viral tracing, the hand region of cebus monkey cerebral M1
was found to possess both efferent and afferent polysynaptic
projections to lobules V and VI (the anterior lobe somatomotor
representation) and HVIIB/HVIII in the posterior lobe (Kelly
and Strick 2003). The intervening posterior lobules, in particular Crus I and II, were spared anatomical connections to
motor cortex but did show projections to prefrontal cortex, an
important observation that is discussed in more detail below.
Human neuroimaging studies have confirmed somatomotor
representations within the cerebellum. In a particularly thorough exploration using task-based functional MRI (fMRI),
Grodd et al. (2001) had subjects make movements that revealed maps of both gross motor topography (foot, hand,
tongue, and lips) as well as fine motor topography (elbow,

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: R. L. Buckner,
Harvard Univ., 52 Oxford St., Northwest Bldg., 280.06, Cambridge, MA
02138 (e-mail: randy_buckner@harvard.edu).

1
Here and elsewhere the term “somatomotor” is chosen because it is
difficult to resolve whether cerebellar representations of body space are
selectively linked to motor cortex or somatosensory cortex.

somatotopy; motor control; prefrontal; functional magnetic resonance
imaging; default network; connectome
THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CEREBELLUM

2322

0022-3077/11 Copyright © 2011 the American Physiological Society

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Buckner RL, Krienen FM, Castellanos A, Diaz JC, Yeo BT. The
organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 106: 2322–2345, 2011. First
published July 27, 2011; doi:10.1152/jn.00339.2011.—The cerebral
cortex communicates with the cerebellum via polysynaptic circuits.
Separate regions of the cerebellum are connected to distinct cerebral
areas, forming a complex topography. In this study we explored the
organization of cerebrocerebellar circuits in the human using restingstate functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI). Data from 1,000 subjects
were registered using nonlinear deformation of the cerebellum in
combination with surface-based alignment of the cerebral cortex. The
foot, hand, and tongue representations were localized in subjects
performing movements. fcMRI maps derived from seed regions
placed in different parts of the motor body representation yielded the
expected inverted map of somatomotor topography in the anterior
lobe and the upright map in the posterior lobe. Next, we mapped the
complete topography of the cerebellum by estimating the principal
cerebral target for each point in the cerebellum in a discovery sample
of 500 subjects and replicated the topography in 500 independent
subjects. The majority of the human cerebellum maps to association
areas. Quantitative analysis of 17 distinct cerebral networks revealed
that the extent of the cerebellum dedicated to each network is
proportional to the network’s extent in the cerebrum with a few
exceptions, including primary visual cortex, which is not represented
in the cerebellum. Like somatomotor representations, cerebellar regions linked to association cortex have separate anterior and posterior
representations that are oriented as mirror images of one another. The
orderly topography of the representations suggests that the cerebellum
possesses at least two large, homotopic maps of the full cerebrum and
possibly a smaller third map.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

wrist, and multiple individuated finger movements). An inverted representation was detected extending from lobule V of
the anterior lobe (foot, arm, and fingers) to just past the primary
fissure in lobule VI (tongue and lip representation). A second
upright representation was detected in VIII and IX. Wiestler et
al. (2011) recently used high-resolution fMRI data acquisition
to localize the representation of the fingers to lobules V and
VIII. Relevant to the present article, the well-characterized
somatomotor representations provide a target for validating
new human neuroimaging techniques.
Uncharted Regions of the Cerebellum

J Neurophysiol • VOL

imaging (Petersen et al. 1989) rekindled interest in the idea that
the cerebellum may interact with the prefrontal cortex and be
important to cognition.
Activation of the cerebellum during cognitive tasks has been
a common observation (Desmond and Fiez 1998; Timmann
and Daum 1997), leading to several explorations of the functional meaning of the responses (e.g., Durisko and Fiez 2010;
Marvell and Desmond 2010; O’Reilly et al. 2008; Spencer et
al. 2007). Recently, Stoodley and Schmahmann (2009) conducted a meta-analysis of previously published articles that
reported cerebellar activations across a range of sensory, motor, and cognitive tasks. By using a meta-analytic approach that
generates spatial maps of consensus responses (Laird et al.
2005), they observed several features of human cerebellar
organization. First, different task domains elicit activation in
distinct cerebellar regions. As expected, anterior and posterior
regions near to or containing the body representations emerge
from tasks that have motor demands. Second, the expanse of
the cerebellum occupied by Crus I and lobules VI and VII
shows consensus activation during tasks that place demands on
cognitive functions including language, working memory, and
executive function. These results reinforce the possibility that
regions of the cerebellum between the known somatomotor
representations contribute to higher level cognition. The expansion of these regions in the human cerebellum may parallel
the expansion of association cortex, including prefrontal cortex
(e.g., see Balsters et al. 2010 for a recent discussion).
Anatomical Evidence for Prefrontal-Cerebellar Circuits
Using anterograde tracing techniques, Schmahmann and
Pandya (1997b) identified projections from dorsolateral and
rostral regions of prefrontal cortex including areas 9, 46, and
10 to the pontine nuclei. The presence of pontine-labeled
neurons indicates that a cerebrocerebellar projection exists,
albeit without specifying where the projection terminates
within the cerebellar cortex. Transneuronal tracing techniques
have revealed both efferent and afferent cerebellar projections
to the prefrontal cortex (Kelly and Strick 2003; Middleton and
Strick 1994, 2001; see Strick et al. 2009 for review). Middleton
and Strick (1994, 2001) first used transneuronal retrograde
tracing to show that prefrontal areas 9m, 9l, and 46 receive
polysynaptic projections from the dentate nucleus. Later advances allowed direct visualization of both anterograde transport (using HSV1) and retrograde transport (using rabies virus)
between prefrontal cortex and the cerebellar cortex itself (Kelly
and Strick 2003). Area 46 was found to possess polysynaptic
projections to cerebellar regions that were spared motor projections. Prefrontal efferents labeled with HSV were found in
Crus II extending into Crus I but were absent in the anterior
lobe. Prefrontal afferents labeled with rabies virus were found
in Crus II.
The findings of Strick and colleagues are important to the
present work for two reasons. First, the results suggest that a
significant portion of the cerebellum between the anterior and
posterior somatomotor representations is linked to cerebral
association cortex. Given that association cortex is disproportionately expanded in humans relative to monkeys and even
apes (Hill et al. 2010; Preuss 2004; Van Essen and Dierker
2007), it is possible that a majority of the cerebellum is
connected to association cortex in the human. Second, the

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

In the monkey, the anterior somatomotor representation
extends just past the primary fissure with the face localized to
the simplex lobule (HVI) (Snider and Eldred 1952). The
second posterior representation is near the paramedian lobule
(HVIII). The relation between the two representations is that of
inversion, much like the mirror-image representations of the
visual field that exist between certain visual areas (e.g., V1 and
V2; Cowey 1964). However, unlike maps of retinal space
within early visual cortex, which are contiguous with one
another (Van Essen et al. 1982; Wandell et al. 2007), the
identified somatomotor maps of the cerebellum leave a large
gap between the two detected representations. This raises an
important question that we attempt to address in this article:
What is mapped to the intervening regions of the cerebellum?
One possibility is that multiple repeated somatomotor maps
exist, creating a set of regions within the cerebellum that have
different or elaborated representations of motor space. Consistent with the possibility that the uncharted regions of the
cerebellum contain multiple somatomotor maps, Schlerf et al.
(2010) recently found preliminary evidence for a second somatomotor map posterior to the primary fissure. In their study,
complex finger and toe movements (involving sequences of
extension and flexion across digits) showed more extensive
activation than simple movements with the toe response extending posterior to the finger response, raising the possibility
of a second adjacent representation. The novel map is hypothesized to participate when complex skilled movements are
performed but less so when simple movements are initiated.
Somatomotor maps with novel properties may occupy a portion of the remaining cerebellar cortex.
A second possibility is that the cerebellum is mapped to
cerebral regions outside the domain of motor function, including areas implicated in cognition. Although we provide evidence in this article to support this second possibility, it is
important to note past findings that have caused opposition to
this idea. Foremost, cerebellar lesions result in profound motor
deficits; cognitive deficits exist but are more subtle (BenYehudah et al. 2007; Schmahmann et al. 2007; Timmann and
Daum 2007). Early physiological and anatomical studies did
search for cerebellar connections with prefrontal association
cortex but found only selective examples (Brodal 1978; Glickstein et al. 1985; Snider and Eldred 1952). As a result of these
anatomical findings, many theories addressing the cerebellum’s evolutionary expansion emphasized motor skills, including volitional control of hand movements (e.g., Glickstein
2007; Holmes 1939). However, a seminal theoretical report by
Leiner et al. (1986; see also Leiner 2010) and a series of
unexpected findings from the emerging field of human neuro-

2323

2324

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

results reveal that multiple closed-loop cerebellar circuits exist
in parallel. The region of the cerebellum that receives projections from area 46 sends projections back to prefrontal area 46;
this region is anatomically distinct from the cerebellar regions
receiving and sending projections to somatomotor cortex. The
presence of multiple, segregated cerebrocerebellar circuits provides an opportunity to map cerebellar topography using human neuroimaging techniques by examining functional coupling between the two structures.
Functional Connectivity Provides a Tool to Map
Cerebellar Organization

J Neurophysiol • VOL

METHODS

Overview
In the present study, we explored the functional organization of the
human cerebellum using resting-state fcMRI. Analyses proceeded in
three phases. First, cerebrocerebellar circuitry of the somatomotor
cortex was explored because of the strong expectations about the
location and topographic organization of the body representations.
Data were acquired from 26 subjects while they performed active
movements of the foot, hand, or tongue. Motor task activation was
used to estimate somatomotor topography. The somatomotor topography of the cerebellum was then analyzed in 1,000 young adults by
exclusively using functional connectivity of resting-state data. The
motor task data served as the reference.
Second, having established that basic properties of cerebellar topography can be revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity, we next
mapped the full extent of the cerebellar cortex. The cerebral networks
defined in the companion paper by Yeo et al. (2011) provided the
basis for this analysis. The strategy was to ask, for each voxel within
the cerebellum, to which cerebral network it was most strongly
correlated. This approach yielded a complete map of the cerebellum
that represented regions of the cerebellum coupled to distinct regions
of the cerebrum.

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Intrinsic low-frequency functional correlations measured by
fMRI can be used to map brain systems in the human (see Fox
and Raichle 2007; Raichle 2011; Van Dijk et al. 2010 for
review). Biswal et al. (1995) first described the approach. They
observed that activity fluctuations within the motor cortex
measured at rest demonstrate functional coupling with the
contralateral motor region and the supplementary motor region
along the medial wall. The correlations were anatomically
selective, suggesting the tool could be used for mapping. Since
then, numerous studies have used this approach, termed functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI), to map brain systems including subdivisions of the cingulate (Margulies et al. 2007),
hippocampal formation (Kahn et al. 2008), amygdala (Roy et
al. 2009), thalamus (Zhang et al. 2008), and striatum (Di
Martino et al. 2008). fcMRI has limitations and interpretational
difficulties, including sensitivity to factors other than anatomical connectivity (Buckner 2010; Cole et al. 2010; Moeller et
al. 2009). We discuss these limitations later when interpreting
results of the present study. Relevant first is that, even with
these limitations, fcMRI is a potentially powerful technique for
mapping cerebrocerebellar circuits.
Initial fcMRI studies of the cerebellum reported multiple
results that are consistent with known anatomical properties of
cerebrocerebellar circuits (Allen et al. 2005; Habas et al. 2009;
Krienen and Buckner 2009; O’Reilly et al. 2010). First, intrinsic activity measured from lateralized seed regions in the
frontal motor cortex is correlated with the contralateral cerebellum more so than the ipsilateral cerebellum. This functional
observation is consistent with the anatomical finding that the
majority of cerebrocerebellar projections are contralateral. Second, the functionally coupled motor regions fall within the
anterior and posterior lobe locations predicted by task-based
analysis of human somatomotor topography. This result indicates that the technique is anatomically specific as well as
sensitive, because both the primary (anterior lobe) and secondary (posterior lobe) somatomotor representations can be detected (e.g., Fig. 1 of Krienen and Buckner 2009; Fig. 1 of
O’Reilly et al. 2010). Third, lateralized infarcts to the basilar
pons selectively disrupt contralateral but not ipsilateral functional coupling between the cerebrum and cerebellum (Lu et al.
in press) as predicted by anatomical studies (Schmahmann et
al. 2004a, 2004b).
Prior fcMRI studies also have observed that a major portion
of the human cerebellum is functionally coupled to cerebral
association areas (Habas et al. 2009; Krienen and Buckner
2009; O’Reilly et al. 2010). These studies generally agree
about the topography of association regions of the cerebellum
despite the use of different analytic approaches and data

samples. For example, they all reported nearly the same locations for human cerebellar somatomotor cortex and also observed that Crus I and II were coupled to cerebral association
areas falling within dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and parietal
association cortex.
The most marked difference between studies occurred in
relation to the estimates of the cerebellar zones coupled to the
human “default network” (Buckner et al. 2008; Raichle et al.
2001; see Yeo et al. 2011 for relevant discussion). Although
both Habas et al. (2009) and Krienen and Buckner (2009)
noted that a cerebellar region associated with the default
network exists within lobule IX, Krienen and Buckner reported
a second major region in Crus I. This difference led the two
reports to emphasize distinct cerebellar regions associated with
the default network: one report focused on lobule IX and the
other on Crus I. This difference may arise from an omission
rather than a true discrepancy. Habas et al. (2009) did not
assign the portion of Crus I in question to any identifiable
cerebral network; rather, there is an absence of a network
assignment in the exact region proposed to align with the
default network in Krienen and Buckner (2009). Thus a careful
assessment of the prior reports suggests general agreement,
with the few differences possibly arising because each study
did not comprehensively survey the cerebellum. These initial
results encourage further exploration.
In this study we mapped the complete topography of the
human cerebellum. In doing so, we sought to extend prior work
to determine whether there were any mapping principles between the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum. By mapping the
full extent of the cerebellum to the cerebral cortex, we were
able to examine whether there were any expansions and restrictions in the representations of specific cortical networks in
the cerebellum and, as a consequence, examine the orderly
representation of different functional domains in the cerebellum. We discovered that the cerebellum possesses multiple
representations of the cerebrum in which the known somatomotor representations are parts of at least two, and possibly
three, homotopic maps of the full cerebrum.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

The final analyses sought to quantify in more detail functional
connectivity between the cerebellum and cerebrum. The strategy was
to define small seed regions within the cerebellum and map the
functionally correlated topography in the cerebral cortex, and to
estimate functional correlation strength between cerebellar regions
and multiple cerebral regions to quantify specificity. These analyses
did not assume that the a priori cortical networks used for the above
analyses were correct. For these analyses, cerebral and cerebellar
regions were always defined in the discovery sample (n ⫽ 500) and
functional connectivity was only quantified in the independent replication sample (n ⫽ 500) to avoid bias.
Participants

MRI Data Acquisition
All data were collected on matched 3T Tim Trio scanners (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using the vendor-supplied 12-channel
phased-array head coil. The functional imaging data were acquired
using a gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence sensitive to
blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast (Kwong et al.
1992; Ogawa et al. 1992). Whole brain coverage including the entire
cerebellum was achieved with 47 3-mm slices aligned to the anterior
commissure-posterior commissure plane using automated alignment
(van der Kouwe et al. 2005). Structural data included a high-resolution multiecho T1-weighted magnetization-prepared gradient-echo
image (multiecho MP-RAGE; van der Kouwe et al. 2008).
For the motor task, subjects performed a blocked-task paradigm
consisting of 40-s blocks of active movement interspersed with 18-s
blocks of passive fixation. For foot movement, subjects alternated
dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of the right foot. For hand movement,
subjects individually lifted the right thumb, index finger, and little
finger in sequence. For tongue movement, subjects moved the tongue
between left, middle, and right positions touching their upper teeth.
For each of six runs, six task blocks were embedded for a total of 36
task blocks per participant. All runs began and ended with visual
fixation. Before each movement block, a 2-s visual cue informed the
subjects to initiate one of three movement types. The fixation crosshair then changed to include a small green circle around its border,
indicating to the subjects to continue their movements. At the end of
the block, the green circle was removed and subjects passively fixated.
The order of movement condition (foot, hand, tongue) was counterbalanced between runs. Subjects practiced the movements before
scanning to ensure they understood the directions and were encouraged to maintain a constant rate of repetitive movement throughout
movement blocks. To reduce extraneous motion, subjects’ legs were
supported in a semiflexed position using an ergonomic knee-to-ankle
cushion. A piece of tape was attached around the right ankle to limit
J Neurophysiol • VOL

leg movement during the foot condition. Arms rested on each side of
the body with the right hand and wrist supported on a flat foam pad.
Functional imaging parameters were as follows: repetition time
(TR) ⫽ 3,000 ms, echo time (TE) ⫽ 30 ms, flip angle (FA) ⫽ 85°,
3 ⫻ 3 ⫻ 3-mm voxels, field of view (FOV) ⫽ 216, and 47 slices
collected with interleaved acquisition and no gap between slices.
Each functional run in the motor task lasted 6 min 27 s (129 time
points). Parameters for the structural scan (multiecho MP-RAGE)
were as follows: TR ⫽ 2,200 ms, TI ⫽ 1,100 ms, TE ⫽ 1.54 ms
for image 1 to 7.01 ms for image 4, FA ⫽ 7°, 1.2 ⫻ 1.2 ⫻-1.2-mm,
and FOV ⫽ 230.
For the resting-state data used for functional connectivity analysis,
subjects were instructed to remain still, stay awake, and keep their
eyes open. The acquisition parameters were identical to those described above, except 124 time points were acquired. Resting-state
data acquisition is described in more detail in Yeo et al. (2011).
Functional MRI Data Preprocessing
The fMRI data were preprocessed as described in the companion
paper (Yeo et al. 2011). Briefly, the first four volumes of each run
were discarded to allow for T1-equilibration effects, slice acquisitiondependent time shifts were compensated per volume using SPM2
(Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK), and
head motion was corrected using rigid body translation and rotation
using the FMRIB Software Library (FSL) (Jenkinson et al. 2002;
Smith et al. 2004). Resting-state data underwent further preprocessing, including low-pass temporal filtering, head-motion regression,
whole brain signal regression, and ventricular and white matter signal
regression. This regression procedure minimized nonneuronal signal
contributions, including respiration-induced signal fluctuations (Birn
et al. 2006; Wise et al. 2004), but shifted the distribution of correlations around zero (Vincent et al. 2006), making physiological interpretation of negative correlations tenuous (Fox et al. 2009; Murphy et
al. 2009; Van Dijk et al. 2010). In this study, we only interpret
positive correlations.
Structural MRI Data Preprocessing and Functional-Structural
Data Alignment
The structural data were processed using the FreeSurfer version
4.5.0 software package (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu), which
provides automated algorithms for reconstructing surface mesh representations of the cortex from individual subject’s structural images
and registering each subject to a common spherical coordinate system
(Dale et al. 1999; Fischl et al. 1999a, 1999b, 2001; Ségonne et al.
2004, 2007). The cortical surface extraction process is described in
Yeo et al. (2011).
The structural and functional images were aligned (Fig. 1, A and B)
using boundary-based registration (Greve and Fischl 2009) within the
FsFast software package (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/
FsFast). The resting-state BOLD fMRI data were then aligned to the
common spherical coordinate system via sampling from the middle of
the cortical ribbon in a single interpolation step. A 6-mm full-width
half-maximum (FWHM) smoothing kernel was applied to the fMRI
data in the surface space, and the data were downsampled to a 4-mm
mesh. See Yeo et al. (2011) for details.
Quality Control
Visual inspection of the registered data suggested that accurate
representations of the cerebellum and cortical surface were obtained
for each subject and that structural and functional image registrations
were successful. In addition, the volumetric registration was verified
to ensure that the cerebellum was successfully aligned between
subjects. Figure 2 shows the results of cerebellar and cortical surface

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Paid participants were clinically normal, English-speaking young
adults with normal or corrected-to-normal vision (ages 18 –35 yr).
Subjects were excluded if their fMRI signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was
low (⬍100; see Yeo et al. 2011), artifacts were detected in the MR
data, their self-reported health information indicated a history of
neurological or psychiatric illness, or they were taking psychoactive
medications. Two data sets were used for analysis. The first data set
involved task-based data collected while subjects made active motor
movements (n ⫽ 26, mean age ⫽ 21.3 yr, 50% male). The data set for
functional connectivity analysis consisted of 1,000 individuals imaged
during eyes open rest (EOR) and was divided into two independent
samples (each n ⫽ 500; labeled the discovery and replication samples). Age and sex were matched for the discovery (mean age ⫽ 21.3
yr, 42.6% male) and replication (mean age ⫽ 21.3 yr, 42.8% male)
samples as described in Yeo et al. (2011). Participants provided
written informed consent in accordance with guidelines set by institutional review boards of Harvard University or Partners Healthcare.

2325

2326

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 1. Hybrid surface- and volume-based
registration. For each subject, the T2* images yielding blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD)-contrast functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data (A)
were registered to the T1-weighted structural
data (B) in the subject’s native space. The
cerebral surface and cerebellar boundary
were estimated based on the structural data
and projected to the BOLD data. The red
lines show the estimated inner boundary of
the cerebral cortical surface at the gray-white
interface. The green line shows the estimated
edge of the cerebellum. The cerebral cortical
surface was then extracted (C) and aligned
between subjects using surface-based registration. The T1-weighted structural data
were also aligned between subjects using
nonlinear volume-based registration (D).
The surface and volume were then registered
to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI)
atlas space (E) for visualization and coordinate reporting.

extraction from the T1 images and T2* to T1 registration of three
typical subjects. Intersubject registration is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Hybrid Surface- and Volume-Based Alignment
The resolution of human imaging techniques is sufficient to
model functional connectivity across the cerebral cortex as a
two-dimensional surface, respecting its topology (Yeo et al. 2011).
In principle, the cerebellar cortex could also be modeled as a
surface (Van Essen 2002). However, the cerebellar cortex is about
one-third the thickness of the cerebral cortex, and the convolutions
are sufficiently more complex, making surface-based reconstruction of functional data impractical within the resolution constraints
of our present data. For this reason, we adopted a hybrid surfaceand volume-based alignment approach. The cerebral cortex was
modeled as a surface as described in Yeo et al. (2011), and the
cerebellum was aligned using nonlinear volumetric registration.
The volumetric registration algorithm proceeded by jointly deforming the structural volume to a probabilistic template and classifying
each native brain voxel into one of multiple brain structures, including
left and right cerebellar gray and white matter (Fischl et al. 2002,
2004). The probabilistic template encodes multiple features including
1) spatial relationships among different anatomical structures (e.g., the
J Neurophysiol • VOL

cerebrum is dorsal to the cerebellum), 2) expected MR intensity given
the acquisition parameters and intrinsic tissue properties estimated as
part of the algorithm (e.g., T1, T2, and T2*), and 3) spatial variation
in MR intensity as a result of spatial variation in intrinsic tissue
properties (e.g., T1 is longer in frontal gray matter than primary
somatomotor cortex).
The nonlinear deformation is represented by a dense displacement
field (i.e., a single displacement vector at each 2-mm isotropic atlas
voxel) and is driven by five energy terms: one to encourage smooth
deformations, one to minimize metric distortion within each anatomical structure, one to encourage the invertibility of the displacement
field, and two terms to maximize the likelihood of the observed image
intensity conditioned on the location and identity of the brain structure. The resulting deformation field, together with the correspondence yielded by the structural-functional data alignment discussed
above, was used to transform the subject’s fMRI data into FreeSurfer
nonlinear volumetric space (Fig. 1, B–D), thus establishing spatial
correspondences between the subject and other subjects that were also
brought into this common coordinate system. The resulting volumetric
fMRI data were smoothed with a 6-mm FWHM smoothing kernel
constrained by the cerebellum mask defined using the FreeSurfer
template (Fischl et al. 2002, 2004).

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2327

Spatial correspondence was established between FSL Montreal
Neurological Institute (MNI) space and the FreeSurfer nonlinear
volumetric space by running the nonlinear FSL MNI152 template
through the FreeSurfer pipeline (Fig. 1, D and E). All cerebellar
analyses were performed in FreeSurfer nonlinear volumetric space.
The use of the nonlinear deformation reduces intersubject anatomical
variability (Fig. 3).
Mapping Between Surface- and Volume-Based Coordinates
and Visualization
At the end of the processing pipeline for a single subject, the
transformation from the subject’s native space to the FreeSurfer
J Neurophysiol • VOL

surface coordinate system was estimated, as well as the transformation
from the subject’s native space to FreeSurfer nonlinear volumetric
space (Fig. 1, A–D). By concatenating the two transformations and
averaging the composed transformations over all 1,000 subjects, we
were able to establish spatial correspondence between the FreeSurfer
surface and volumetric coordinate systems. Since the spatial correspondence between FSL MNI152 space and FreeSurfer nonlinear
volumetric space was also estimated by running the FSL MNI152
template through the FreeSurfer pipeline (Fig. 1, D and E), this
allowed us to obtain spatial correspondences between FSL MNI152
space and FreeSurfer surface space by running the FSL MNI152
template (Fig. 1E) through the FreeSurfer pipeline.

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 2. Examples of within-subject surface and
volume extraction. Examples of the extracted
cerebral cortex surface and cerebellum boundaries are shown for 3 typical subjects within
their native space. The green line shows the
estimate edge of the cerebellum tailored to each
individual subject’s T1-weighted image to illustrate deviations in the T2* images. Imperfections are apparent in the BOLD data, especially
in regions prone to susceptibility artifact (e.g.,
inferior temporal cortex).

2328

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

These correspondences were used 1) to compute functional connectivity between the volume and surface representations and 2) to
estimate atlas coordinates using the MNI coordinate framework (Evans et al. 1993) as implemented in the nonlinear FSL MNI152 space
(Fonov et al. 2011). For example, signal modulation from a seed
region in the cerebellum could be extracted and the functionally
correlated surface map computed (see below). The locations of the
seed regions could also be described in terms of MNI coordinates
even though they were estimated from functional data analyzed
within a surface representation.
Although all analyses were performed in FreeSurfer surface and
volumetric space, for the purpose of visualization, maps were displayed in the volume using the MNI atlas space and for the surface on
the left and right inflated PALS cortical surfaces using Caret software
(Van Essen 2005). Cerebellar nomenclature uses the conventions of
Larsell (1970) as described in the MRI atlas of Schmahmann et al.
(1999, 2000). Diedrichsen et al. (2009) was also relied on to determine
fissure and lobule locations.
Regression of Adjacent Cerebral Cortex Signal when Analyzing
the Cerebellum
The close physical proximity of the cerebellum to ventral regions
of the cerebral cortex results in the blurring of fMRI signal across the
cerebellar-cerebral boundary, especially between the visual cortex and
the putative somatomotor regions of the cerebellar anterior lobe.
Consequently, when no steps are taken to address this issue, functional coupling between neighboring regions of the cerebellum and
cerebral cortex is detected that masks functional coupling of the
cerebellum to other cerebral regions. To map the full extent of the
cerebellar cortex to its principal cerebral targets, we adopted an
additional processing step.
The signal arising from the cerebral cortex immediately adjacent to
the cerebellum was regressed from the cerebellar signal. This was
accomplished by computing masks of left and right cerebral cortex
within 6 and 7 mm, respectively, from the cerebellum. The spatial
J Neurophysiol • VOL

extent of the cerebellum was defined using the FreeSurfer template
(Fischl et al. 2002, 2004). The distances used to define the cortical
masks were chosen so that the masks wrapped around the adjacent
cerebellum. The distances were asymmetric so that the left and right
cerebral cortex contributed roughly equally to the regression. For each
individual subject, the fMRI signal within the left and right cerebral
cortex masks were averaged and regressed from the smoothed fMRI
data within the cerebellum. This regression procedure allows mapping
of the full surface of the anterior lobe. Because the regression may
cause artifactual reduction of true correlation of cerebral regions in the
analysis, especially visual cortex, additional analyses were performed
with and without regression for key results.
SNR Maps
Temporal SNR of the motion-corrected fMRI time series was computed for each voxel in the subject’s native volumetric space by averaging
the signal intensity across the whole run and dividing it by the standard
deviation over time. The SNR was averaged across runs within subject
when multiple runs were available. The SNR was then averaged across
the 1,000 subjects from the core data set and displayed in the volume to
visualize the SNR of the cerebellum. SNR was good throughout the full
extent of cerebellum, with minimal evidence for significant signal loss.
However, because the cerebral cortex did possess regions of low SNR,
particularly within regions prone to susceptibility artifact, including orbital frontal cortex and inferior portions of the temporal lobe (see Fig. 3
of Yeo et al. 2011), for analyses exploring correlation between the
cerebellum and cerebrum, there may be low power to accurately characterize cerebellar regions that are coupled to affected cerebral targets. This
issue should be kept in mind when interpreting maps of the cerebellum.
Seed Region Correlation Estimates Between the Cerebellum and
Cerebrum
The hybrid surface- and volume-based alignment allowed us to
perform region-based analyses between the cerebellum of a subject in

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 3. Examples of between-subject cerebellar alignment. Volumetric alignment is illustrated for the structural data from 3 typical
subjects. The green line represents a loosefitting cerebellar edge estimated from the
group template and is displayed identically
across the 3 subjects as a reference to illustrate
how each individual conforms to the group
template. Each subject’s cerebellum is well
registered in relation to the template. Close
examination reveals subtle differences between subjects reflecting alignment errors on
the order of a few millimeters. There was no
attempt to align the details of the folia between subjects.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2329

To quantify functional connectivity between regions based on
surface vertices and volumetric voxels, Fisher’s r-to-z transformed
correlations were computed for each subject within a group. Classical
statistical analyses, including t-tests and ANOVA, were then performed on the z-correlations using Matlab 7.4 (The Mathworks,
Natick, MA) or SPSS 18.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY).
Selecting Regions for Functional Connectivity Analysis

FreeSurfer nonlinear volume space and the cerebrum of the same
subject in FreeSurfer surface space. Cerebellar maps for specific
cerebral regions were obtained by computing the Pearson’s product
moment correlation between the surface region’s preprocessed resting
fMRI time course and the time courses of the voxels within the region
of the cerebellum. Cerebral regions included a single surface vertex
(⬃4 ⫻ 4 mm) but should be considered spatially more extensive
because of the spatial smoothing. Conversely, correlation maps from
cerebellar regions were obtained by computing the correlation between the voxel’s time course and the time courses of all vertices on
the cerebral cortical surface. Cerebellar volumetric regions were also
restricted to single voxels (2 ⫻ 2 ⫻ 2 mm) and impacted by spatial
smoothing.
To obtain group-averaged correlation z-maps, the correlation maps
of individual subjects were converted to individual subject z-maps
using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation and then averaged across all
subjects in the group. The Fisher’s r-to-z transformation increases
normality of the distribution of correlations in the sample. For subjects
with multiple runs, the individual subject z-maps were first averaged
within the subject before submitting to the group average. An inverse
Fisher’s r-to-z transformation was then applied to the group-averaged
correlation z-map, yielding a group-averaged correlation map.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

Motor Task Analysis
After preprocessing, the task data collected in the 26 subjects were
analyzed using the general linear model (GLM), including the three
movement conditions as well as fixation as regressors of interest. The
onsets of the three movement events were modeled 2 s after the

Table 1. Locations of seed regions used to quantify specificity of
somatomotor networks
Left Coordinates
Cerebral Cortex
M1F
M1H
M1T
S1F
S1H
S1T
FEF
PrCv
Cerebellum
Foot
Hand
Tongue

Right Coordinates

⫺6, ⫺26, 76
⫺41, ⫺20, 62
⫺55, ⫺4, 26
⫺10, ⫺42, 74
⫺42, ⫺35, 65
⫺64, ⫺8, 27
⫺26, ⫺6, 48
⫺50, 6, 30

6, ⫺26, 76
41, ⫺20, 62
55, ⫺4, 26
10, ⫺42, 74
42, ⫺35, 65
64, ⫺8, 27
26, ⫺6, 48
50, 6, 30

⫺17, ⫺33, ⫺26
⫺20, ⫺52, ⫺24
⫺18, ⫺61, ⫺21

14, ⫺34, ⫺26
17, ⫺52, ⫺24
16, ⫺61, ⫺22

Coordinates represent x, y, z in the atlas space of the Montreal Neurological
Institute (MNI). Motor task functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
together with probabilistic histological maps of areas 2 and 4 (Geyer et al.
1996; Grefkes et al. 2001; Fischl et al. 2008) were used to identify M1F, M1H,
M1T, S1F, S1H, and S1T in the left hemispheres (where subscripts F, H, and T
indicate foot, hand, and tongue representations) and were reflected across the
midline in MNI space to obtain seed regions in the right hemisphere. Motor
task fMRI was also used to identify motor seed regions in the right cerebellum.
Left frontal eye field (FEF) and ventral precentral cortex (PrCv) seed regions
were obtained from Yeo et al. (2011). Contralateral cerebellar seed regions
were obtained by reflection across the midline in the native FreeSurfer volume
space, leading to asymmetric MNI atlas coordinates in some instances.

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 4. Functional connectivity of the cerebral motor hand region reveals
contralateral somatomotor regions of the cerebellum. Coronal sections (top,
y ⫽ ⫺20; bottom, y ⫽ ⫺55) display functional connectivity for the direct
contrast between seed motor regions placed in the left and right hand regions
of 1,000 subjects (white circles in top section display the region locations).
Each panel shows connectivity maps for a different coronal section (top: y ⫽
⫺20 mm, the section containing the hand region of M1; bottom: y ⫽ ⫺55 mm,
the section containing the cerebellar hand representation). Red colors display
connectivity of the right motor seed region subtracted from the left motor seed
region; blue colors display the reverse subtraction. Note the crossed lateralization and double representation in the cerebellum, including the strong
primary somatomotor representation in the anterior lobe (top) and the slightly
weaker secondary representation in the posterior lobe (bottom). Color bars
indicate the correlation strength [z(r)]. The correlation strength near to the seed
regions (top) is considerably stronger than the distant correlations (bottom),
necessitating plotting the data using different scales. The left hemisphere is
displayed at left (neurological convention).

Surface and volumetric regions for functional connectivity analysis
were selected using criteria appropriate for the purpose of the given
analysis. Regional vertices and voxels corresponding to the hand, foot,
and tongue representations in the cerebrum and cerebellum were derived
based on the analysis of the motor task data set (see Motor task analysis
for further details). When testing for seed-based confirmation of the
resolved cerebellar topography, the confidence maps of the discovery
sample were used to derive cerebellar regions to be tested in the replication sample. In addition, we utilized a subset of cerebral regions defined
in the companion paper (Yeo et al. 2011) for certain analyses. This subset
of regions was selected based on 1) the meta-analysis of putative human
frontal eye field (FEF) coordinates reported in the fMRI literature, 2)
probabilistic histological maps of V1 (Amunts et al. 2000; Fischl et al.
2008) and MT⫹ (Malikovic et al. 2007; Wilms et al. 2005; Yeo et al.
2010) estimated from 10 subjects mapped to FreeSurfer surface space,
and 3) the estimated cerebral network boundaries and confidence in the
discovery sample. Further details can be found in Yeo et al. (2011). If a
particular data set was used for defining the region (e.g., discovery
sample), functional connectivity was always computed with a different
data set (e.g., replication sample), providing unbiased measurement of
correlation strength.

2330

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

appearance of the cue to account for potential differences in movement initiation/preparation times across the different motor effectors.
The duration of each event was set to the remaining duration of each
movement block (40 s), and events were modeled with a canonical
hemodynamic response function along with its temporal derivative.
Regressors of no interest included run means, low-frequency linear
trends, and six parameters obtained for correction of rigid body head
motion. Contrasts of interest were constructed and analyzed using the
SPM2 software package (Friston et al. 1995).
GLM analyses were performed in subjects’ native fMRI space.
The maps of individual subjects corresponding to each movement
contrast were then transformed onto the FreeSurfer surface coordinate system and averaged across subjects. The averaged contrast
maps, together with probabilistic histological maps of areas 2 and
4 (Geyer et al. 1996, Grefkes et al. 2001; Fischl et al. 2008), were
used to identify peak vertices in M1 and S1 associated with each
particular movement.
For the cerebellum, the contrast maps of individual subjects corresponding to hand ⬎ foot and foot ⬎ tongue were transformed into
FreeSurfer nonlinear volumetric space and averaged across subjects.

The averaged hand ⬎ foot contrast map was used to identify peak
voxels associated with either hand or foot movement, whereas the
averaged tongue ⬎ foot contrast map was used to identify the peak
voxel associated with tongue movement. Comparisons of these conditions to fixation produced similar peak coordinates. However, the
direct comparison of the two movement conditions additionally removed nonspecific responses in the cerebellum and was therefore
preferred (similar to Krienen and Buckner 2009).
Because the task consisted of right hand and foot motion, we selected
peaks in the left hemisphere of the cerebrum and in the right hemisphere
of the cerebellum. Corresponding seed locations in the contralateral
hemispheres were determined by reflecting the peak coordinates across
the midline. The bilateral sets of seed regions derived from this procedure
were then carried forward to estimate the cerebellar topography of the
three motor effectors in the independent resting-state data.
Distribution of Parcellations and Raw Data
A primary result of our analyses is the parcellation of the
cerebellum into networks. The parcellations in FreeSurfer space
Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 5. Functional connectivity reveals inverted somatomotor topography within the anterior lobe of the cerebellum that is comparable to task-evoked estimates.
A: the cerebral (right hemisphere) and cerebellar (left hemisphere) locations of the hind paw (green), forepaw (red), and face (blue) somatomotor representations
in the monkey are known from physiological responses to stimulation. Note that the representation of body space is inverted in the anterior lobe. [Adapted from
Adrian (1943).] B: the cerebral somatomotor topography evoked by foot (green), hand (red), and tongue (blue) movements as measured by task fMRI in the
human. C: the inverted somatomotor topography is clearly present in the anterior lobe of the contralateral cerebellum. D: right cerebral seed regions were defined
based on the task activation data in B and reflected across the midline. The seed regions are illustrated for the right hemisphere to show their positions relative
to the left hemisphere task data. E: the somatomotor map in the cerebellum is displayed based exclusively on functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI) with the
contralateral cerebrum. The inverted somatomotor topography is present and similar to the task-based estimates, suggesting functional connectivity can resolve
distinct regions of body space within the cerebellum. F: 3 views of somatomotor representation within the cerebellum are illustrated. Each estimate comes from
a bilateral cerebral region and represents the extent of the functionally coupled response thresholded at r ⫽ 0.04. Displayed coordinates represent the plane in
MNI atlas space. Note that the anterior lobe representation is inverted with the foot anterior to the hand and tongue, whereas the posterior lobe representation
is upright with the tongue anterior to the hand and foot.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2331

are available (http://www.freesurfer.net/fswiki/CerebellumParcellation_Buckner2011). Movies of the region-based functional connectivity estimates can be downloaded from http://www.youtube.com/bucknerkrienen. The raw functional MRI data from the 1,000
subjects in the functional connectivity analysis will be made
openly available to researchers using the procedures established by
the OASIS data releases (Marcus et al. 2007, 2010) and the 1,000
Functional Connectomes Project (Biswal et al. 2010).
RESULTS

Cerebral Motor Regions Show Functional Connectivity with
the Contralateral Cerebellum

Functional Connectivity Reveals the Somatomotor
Topography of the Cerebellum
Functional connectivity maps from specific cerebral seed
regions located in the foot, hand, and tongue representations
revealed the expected inverted topography in the contralateral
cerebellum (Fig. 5). Results from task-based mapping of cerebellar somatomotor topography (Fig. 5C) and the mapping
determined exclusively from functional connectivity (Fig. 5E)
are displayed on the cerebellar surface to allow comparison
with each other and with Edgar Adrian’s 1943 map of cerebellar topography in the monkey (Fig. 5A). The results from the
functional connectivity analysis were generally more specific
than the task-based activation maps and reveal both the anterior
and posterior lobe somatomotor representations (the task-based
data did not), but these differences are likely a function of
statistical power. The functional connectivity results are based
on all 1,000 subjects, whereas the task-based estimates come
from 26 subjects who performed active motor tasks.
Figure 5F displays the cerebellar somatomotor representation in more detail, including sagittal views to illustrate the
reversal of the topographic map ordering between the anterior
and posterior lobes. In the anterior lobe, the representation
progresses from foot to hand to tongue (inverted representation). In the posterior lobe, the representation progresses from
tongue to hand to foot (upright representation).
Figure 6 quantifies the asymmetry of functional connectivity. The task-based activation of the cerebellar hand region was
strongly lateralized (subjects moved only their right hands),
whereas the tongue region was bilateral, consistent with the
bilateral nature of the tongue movement (Fig. 6A). The foot
lateralization was intermediate. Functional connectivity results
(Fig. 6B) revealed a similar pattern of asymmetry, with the
right cerebral hand region showing strong correlation with the
contralateral but not ipsilateral cerebellar regions. The tongue
was bilateral, and the foot was intermediate. The 2 ⫻ 3
ANOVA including laterality (ipsilateral, contralateral) and
motor region (foot, hand, mouth) found a significant interaction
J Neurophysiol • VOL

Fig. 6. Asymmetry of somatomotor representations. A: the task-based somatomotor representation is displayed for both the left and right hemispheres of the
cerebellum. The tongue representation is bilateral, whereas the hand and foot
are lateralized. B: functional correlation strengths are plotted for the ipsilateral
(I) and contralateral (C) cerebrocerebellar region pairs based exclusively on
functional connectivity. Error bars display standard error of the mean. Note
that the foot and hand are lateralized, with the hand strongly lateralized. The
tongue representation is bilateral. The lateralization-by-region interaction is
significant (P ⬍ 0.001), indicating that intrinsic functional correlations show
differential lateralization across the body map paralleling the task-based
estimates.

(P ⬍ 0.001). Although it is not possible to rule out tongue
movements during resting-state scanning, it is nonetheless
interesting to note that the asymmetry of cerebrocerebellar
functional connectivity parallels task-based patterns of
asymmetry.
Functional Connectivity Reveals a Complete Functional Map
of the Cerebellum
Having established that functional connectivity can map the
topography of cerebellar somatomotor regions with a high
degree of specificity, we next mapped the full topography of
the cerebellum. The analysis strategy estimated, for each cerebellar voxel, its profile of connectivity to 1,175 cortical
regions of interest defined in Fig. 4 of Yeo et al. (2011). A
winner-take-all algorithm was adopted such that each cerebellar voxel was assigned to the cerebral network with the most
similar profile of connectivity. Thus one limitation of this
approach is that the algorithm assumes that there is a single
best network. A second limitation is that the cerebral networks
are assumed to have a specific topography. Analyses discussed
later in this article address both of these limitations.
Figures 7–10 display the main results. Figure 7 displays the
reliability of the functional maps of the cerebellum based on
connectivity to the 7 major cerebral networks as well as for the

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Subtraction of functional connectivity maps from left and
right motor cortex seed regions revealed robust contralateral
connectivity in the cerebellum (Fig. 4). Results are shown for
analysis of all 1,000 subjects. Coordinates of the motor cortex
seed regions are reported in Table 1. The cerebral seed regions
were localized within the hand representations. Both the primary and secondary somatomotor representations in the anterior and posterior lobes are evident. Moreover, the functional
connectivity is specific to the expected regions of the cerebellum and not broadly throughout the cerebellum.

2332

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

17-network estimate (see Yeo et al. 2011). Figure 8 displays a
best estimate of the 7-network parcellation of the cerebellum
using all 1,000 subjects. Figure 9 displays a best estimate of the
finer parcellation using 17 networks. Figure 10 displays the
confidence estimates of the parcellations.
Several results are notable. First, expected regions in the
anterior and posterior lobes mapped to the somatosensory
cerebral network (including lobules IV, V, VI, and VIIIB as
shown in blue in Fig. 8). The fine-parcellated cerebral map
included two separate networks for somatomotor cortex, one
encompassing the hand and foot representations and a second
including the face representation. The cerebellar map based on
the fine-parcellated solution correctly positioned these topographic regions (colored aqua and blue in Fig. 9). Although
unsurprising, these results suggest that our mapping approach
is valid. The somatomotor representation did extend into the
simplex lobule (HVI). However, HVI largely mapped to cerebral networks associated with premotor cortex and the supplementary motor area.
Second, the majority of the cerebellum mapped to cerebral
association networks, including those associated with sensorymotor integration (colored green in Fig. 8), cognitive control
(orange), and the default network (red). Cerebellar regions
mapped to the cerebral association networks included the
entirety of Crus I and II as well as portions of the simplex
J Neurophysiol • VOL

lobule (HVI), HVIIB, and IX. The cerebellar map generally did
not distinguish the vermis from the hemispheres, but rather
tended to show topographic specificity along the anterior to
posterior axis. However, hints of longitudinal organization can
be seen in the coronal sections. For example, the somatomotor
regions of the cerebellum are closer to the vermis and do not
extend significantly into the hemispheres (e.g., Fig. 8, coronal
section y ⫽ ⫺52).
Third, the cerebellar map did not contain representation of
early visual cortex. The fine-parcellated cerebral map contained separate visual networks that roughly encompassed
central and peripheral representations of the retinotopically
defined visual areas (colored purple and dark red in Fig. 9; see
Yeo et al. 2011). Neither of the visual networks displayed
functional coupling within the cerebellum.
A final, potentially important observation emerged. As with
the somatomotor representation, the cerebellum also possessed
a double representation of each cerebral network along its
anterior-to-posterior axis, except for the representation of the
default network (colored in red in Fig. 8). The representation of
the cerebral default network fell at the intersection of the two
topographies. That is, the map of the cerebellum contained a
full inverted map of the cerebral cortex in its anterior extent
and then a second upright representation in its posterior extent.
The well-established anterior and posterior lobe representa-

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 7. Reliability of maps of the human
cerebellum based on functional connectivity.
Every voxel within the cerebellum is colored
based on its maximal functional correlation
with a cerebral network in the discovery
sample (n ⫽ 500) and replicated in the replication sample (n ⫽ 500). The 2 left columns
display the parcellation based on the 7 cerebral networks shown at bottom left (from Yeo
et al. 2011). For example, the blue regions of
the cerebellum include those voxels that are
more strongly correlated with the blue cerebral network (involving somatosensory and
motor cortices) than any other network. The
2 right columns display the parcellation
based on the 17 cerebral networks shown at
bottom right (from Yeo et al. 2011). Note
that the discovery and replication maps are
highly similar.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2333

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 8. A map of the human cerebellum based on functional connectivity to 7 major networks in the cerebrum. Every voxel within the cerebellum is colored based
on its maximal functional correlation with a cerebral network in the full sample of 1,000 individuals. The map is based on the 7 cerebral networks shown at bottom
(from Yeo et al. 2011). The sections display coronal (right), saggittal (middle), and transverse (left) images: A, anterior; P, posterior; L, left; R, right; S, superior;
and I, inferior. The coordinates at bottom right of each panel represent the section level in the MNI atlas space. Major fissures are demarcated on the left
hemisphere, and lobules are labeled on the right hemisphere. AF, ansoparamedian fissure; HF, horizontal fissure; IbF, intrabiventer fissure; IcF, intraculminate
fissure; PbF, prepyramidal/prebiventer fissure; PF, primary fissure; PLF, posterolateral fissure; PrcF, preculminate fissure; SF, secondary fissure; SPF, superior
posterior fissure. Note that this mapping method identifies the correct locations of the primary and secondary somatomotor regions in the anterior and posterior
lobes of the cerebellum (shown in blue). The cerebellar hemispheres primarily map to cerebral networks involving association cortex (as exemplified by the
networks illustrated in red and orange).
J Neurophysiol • VOL

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

2334

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 9. A fine-parcellated map of the human cerebellum based on functional connectivity to 17 networks in the cerebrum. The format and abbreviations are the
same as in Fig. 8 but in this instance are in relation to a finer cerebral parcellation involving 17 networks (from Yeo et al. 2011). These data are from the full
sample of 1,000 individuals.

tions of somatomotor cortex may reflect portions of a larger
duplicated map of the cerebral cortex within the cerebellum.
There is also evidence for a smaller third map in the more
posterior extent of the cerebellum. We return to the intriguing
possibility that the cerebellum possesses multiple complete
maps of the cerebral cortex in the DISCUSSION.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

One technical question arises: How many subjects are required to estimate cerebellar topography? Although we could
not consistently obtain stable maps of the full cerebellum in
individual subjects, the major networks could often be identified (e.g., see the individual subject analyses in Krienen and
Buckner 2009). Complete topographic maps that captured

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2335

Fig. 10. Confidence of the parcellation estimates. Confidence (silhouette)
values for each voxel of the cerebellum with respect to its assigned network are
displayed for the 7 (left)- and 17-network (right) estimates. Estimation of the
silhouette values are described in Yeo et al. (2011). Much like the cerebral
parcellation (see Yeo et al. 2011), regions near network boundaries are less
confident.

much of the topography of the 7-network parcellation could be
produced with as few as 10 subjects. Details of the 17-network
parcellation, borders between regions, and the edge of the
cerebellum near to the cerebral cortex required much larger
sample sizes to stabilize.
The Cerebellum Is Proportionately Mapped to the Cerebrum
with a Few Exceptions
The analyses above resulted in a complete map of the
anterior and posterior cerebellar lobes. Such a map provides
an opportunity to ask quantitative questions about the relaJ Neurophysiol • VOL

Fig. 11. Quantitative relation between the extent of cerebral and cerebellar
cortices dedicated to distinct functional networks. The percentage of cerebral
surface area dedicated to each network is plotted against the volumetric
percentage of the cerebellar gray matter dedicated to the same network. These
estimates are based on 1,000 subjects. A: the reference map is illustrated with
numbers identifying the estimated networks. B: the quantitative relation is
plotted with the best-fit line. Open circles represent individual networks, with
their networks labeled by numbers corresponding to A. The x’s represent
networks whose cortical partners are used in regression (e.g., visual cortex),
possibly biasing analysis (see Fig. 12 for elaboration).

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

tion between cerebellar and cortical mapping: Is the size of
a cerebellar region dedicated to a network proportionate to
its representation in the cerebral cortex? And what is the
relative proportion of the cerebellum dedicated to putatively
motor vs. nonmotor cerebral networks? To address these
questions, we calculated the percentage of the cerebral
surface area occupied by each of the networks from the
17-network parcellation (from all 1,000 subjects). We next
calculated the volume of the cerebellum dedicated to that
same network after masking the cerebellum to include only
gray matter. The assumption is that the cerebellar volume of
a region is a reasonable proxy for the cerebellar cortical area
(which could not be computed due to resolution limitations).
Figure 11 plots the results.
Results showed that, in general, there is a strong relation
between the cerebral surface area and its representation in the
cerebellum; the relation appears to be roughly homotopic.
Networks with the largest percentages of the cerebrum tend to
have the largest cerebellar representations. However, there are
exceptions. Some regions have no detectable representation in
the cerebellum, including early visual (networks 1 and 2) and
auditory (network 14) networks.

2336

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

Primary Visual Cortex and Auditory Cortex Are Not
Represented in the Human Cerebellum

Table 2. Locations of seed regions used to quantify specificity of
association networks

Cerebral cortex
M1H
S1H
FEF
PrCv
6vr⫹
PFCda
V1p
V1c
MT⫹
PCC
PFCd
STS
PFCla
PFClp
Cerebellum
Ventral attention
Frontoparietal control
Default network
Dorsal attention

Left Coordinates

Right Coordinates

⫺41, ⫺20, 62
⫺42, ⫺35, 65
⫺26, ⫺6, 48
⫺50, 6, 30
⫺55, 6, 11
⫺31, 39, 30
⫺16, ⫺74, 7
⫺13, ⫺100, ⫺8
⫺45, ⫺72, 3
⫺3, ⫺49, 25
⫺15, 42, 46
⫺55, ⫺10, ⫺16
⫺41, 55, 4
⫺45, 29, 32

41, ⫺20, 62
42, ⫺35, 65
26, ⫺6, 48
50, 6, 30
55, 6, 11
31, 39, 30
16, ⫺74, 7
13, ⫺100, ⫺8
45, ⫺72, 3
3, ⫺49, 25
15, 42, 46
55, ⫺10, ⫺16
41, 55, 4
45, 29, 32

⫺31, ⫺62, ⫺21
⫺42, ⫺73, ⫺26
⫺32, ⫺79, ⫺31
⫺6, ⫺76, ⫺43

30, ⫺62, ⫺21
39, ⫺72, ⫺27
29, ⫺78, ⫺32
9, ⫺75, ⫺43

Left cerebral cortical seed regions were obtained from Yeo et al. (2011)
except PFCd, which was selected from the high-confidence default network
region in the dorsal prefrontal cortex in the discovery data set. Left cerebellar
seed regions were selected from each association network based on the
discovery data set, using the confidence map as a guide. Contralateral seed
regions were obtained by reflection across the midline. M1, primary motor
cortex; S1, somatosensory cortex; V1, visual cortex; PCC, posterior cingulate
cortex; STS, superior temporal sulcus. Labels for the regions within the
cerebellum correspond to the network names as commonly used in the human
neuroimaging literature and should be used as heuristics (see Yeo et al. 2011
for discussion). Alternative names and variations exist. For example, the
ventral attention network is most likely an aggregate of closely adjacent
networks variably referred to as the ventral attention, salience (Seeley et al.
2007), and cingulo-opercular (Dosenbach et al. 2007) networks. Similarly, the
default network can be meaningfully fractionated (e.g., Andrews-Hanna et al.
2010).
J Neurophysiol • VOL

Quantitative Measurement of Cerebrocerebellar Circuits
Demonstrates Specificity
Analyses up to this point focused on cerebellar maps based
on estimating the primary functionally coupled targets for
defined cerebral networks. Such analyses assume that the
topographies of cerebral networks are respected by the cerebrocerebellar connectivity patterns. If a region in the cerebellum correlated with a fundamentally different pattern in the
cerebrum, it would still be assigned to the best-fitting network
and the discrepancy would go undetected. To address this
issue, we conducted a series of analyses with two goals. First,
the full cerebral connectivity patterns were mapped for specific
cerebellar seed regions. Such maps are not bound by assumptions about the cerebral topography and thus serve to independently verify whether the networks described above accurately
represent cerebrocerebellar circuits as measured by functional
connectivity. Second, functional connectivity was measured
between multiple seed regions within the cerebellum and the
cerebrum to quantitatively explore specificity of cerebrocerebellar circuits. As with earlier analyses, we began by focusing
on somatomotor cortex because of its established properties.
After analysis of somatomotor cortex, we extended the procedures to cerebrocerebellar circuits linked to association areas.
Figure 13 displays results for somatomotor cortex. Seed
regions were placed along the right somatomotor representation
of the cerebellar anterior lobe within the estimated foot, hand, and
tongue representations. The cerebral functional connectivity maps
were then computed for each topographically specific set of seed
regions (Fig. 13A). Results revealed that, at a map level, the
functionally correlated cerebral regions are restricted to the somatomotor cortex and march from the midline to lateral surface as
expected based on known topography. The cerebral topography
appeared specific. See http://www.youtube.com/bucknerkrienen
for animation of this observation.
Somatomotor cortex. Region-based correlations were next
computed to quantify these observations. Functional connectivity strengths between each cerebellar seed region and
the entire set of cerebral somatomotor regions were computed and plotted in polar form (Fig. 13, B and C). Functional connectivity strengths were computed between the
contralateral cerebral and cerebellar regions and averaged
across the hemispheres. The polar plot displays functional
connectivity strength from ⫺0.05 to 0.25. Note that the
coupling between the cerebellum and cerebral cortex is
preferential to the representations of the relevant body part.
Moreover, none of the cerebellar regions associated with the
primary somatosensory representations are coupled to the
putative human FEF region. These results quantitatively
demonstrate a high level of specificity between the cerebellum and cerebral partners in somatomotor cortex.
Association cortex. We next generalized the approach described above to explore four regions of the cerebellum

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Exceptions to the general trend for cerebral areas to have
proportionate representations in the cerebellum were found for
visual and auditory cortices. However, these analyses have
limitations. First, because the cerebellar voxels are assigned to
their most strongly correlated cerebral network, it remains
possible that correlations are present but that they are overshadowed by correlations to other networks. Second, to reduce
induction of artifactual correlations in the cerebellum from
immediately adjacent occipital cortex, the signal from these
regions was regressed out (see METHODS). Thus it is possible
that the extent of the cerebellum coupled to visual cortex is
underestimated.
We conducted analyses to address these issues. Regions
were defined within the central and peripheral estimates of V1
based on histology. Coordinate locations of the visual seed
regions are reported in Table 2. Functional connectivity with
each of these cerebral regions was then mapped within the
cerebellum for the full sample of 1,000 subjects. The map was
computed for each visual region in isolation without reference
to other cerebral networks. Furthermore, fcMRI maps were
computed with and without regression of signal from occipital
cortex near to the cerebellum. Results are shown in Fig. 12. No

evidence for functional coupling of central or peripheral V1
with the cerebellum was detected beyond coupling of cerebellar cortex immediately adjacent to visual cortex. The
same analysis was repeated for a region at or near auditory
cortex (Fig. 12; x, y, z MNI coordinate ⫽ ⫺51, ⫺45, 11).
Again, no evidence was found for functional coupling
within the cerebellum.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2337

coupled to cerebral association cortex (Fig. 14). Again, the
cerebral maps derived from functional connectivity with
cerebellar seed regions reveal specific topography. Each set
of cerebellar seed regions mapped to a distinct set of distributed cerebral regions. Of importance, the cerebral regions largely fall within the networks as defined in Yeo et al.
(2011). For example, cerebellar seed regions on the border
of Crus I/II (Fig. 14A) demonstrate functional connectivity
with distributed cerebral regions linked to the default network, including the posterior cingulate, the lateral temporal
cortex, the inferior parietal lobule, and an extended region
along medial prefrontal cortex. By contrast, distinct cerebellar seed regions anterior in Crus I (Fig. 14B) demonstrate
functional connectivity with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
the rostral portion of the inferior parietal lobule, and a
frontal midline region bordering presupplementary motor
area and the anterior cingulate.
The four cerebrocerebellar circuits involving association
cortex were quantified. Distributed cerebral regions were selected as shown in Fig. 15A. The correlation strengths between
J Neurophysiol • VOL

the cerebellar regions and the distributed cerebral regions are
displayed in Fig. 15, B–E. Much like the selectivity observed
for the somatomotor regions (Fig. 13), the cerebrocerebellar
circuits involving association cortex also display selectivity.
These results support the hypothesis that cerebrocerebellar
circuits arising from distinct cerebellar regions are selective for
separate and distributed cerebral networks. The selectivity does
not divide broad lobar regions of the cerebral cortex (e.g., the
frontal lobe vs. the parietal lobe), but rather maps to distributed
regions that are components of distinct functionally coupled
cerebral networks (Yeo et al. 2011).
DISCUSSION

The results revealed both expected and novel organizational
properties of the human cerebellum. Confirming known functional anatomy, somatomotor representations of body space
were observed in the anterior and posterior lobes that were
topographically mapped and preferentially contralateral with
respect to the cerebrum. Somatomotor regions occupied only a
small portion of the cerebellum. The majority of the human

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 12. Evidence that the human cerebellum does not show functional connectivity with primary visual and auditory cortices. Functional connectivity between
the primary visual cortex and the cerebellum was examined in detail. A: 2 primary visual cortex regions were selected based on postmortem histological estimates
on V1 projected onto the cortical surface reference. V1p, peripheral representation of V1; V1c, central representation of V1. Shaded yellow areas represent the
surface projection of histologically estimated V1. A region near auditory cortex (right) was also selected. B: functional connectivity maps for each seed region
without (no regress) and with regression of the visual signal near the cerebellum (vis regress). Regression was removed to ensure that the map is not
underestimating the representation of visual or auditory regions within the cerebellum. There is no evidence for representation of primary visual or auditory
cortices within the cerebellum except for cerebellar cortex just adjacent to visual cortex (marked by an asterisk in leftmost column).

2338

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

cerebellum mapped to cerebral association cortex in an approximately homotopic manner: the largest cerebral networks were
associated with the most extensive representations in the cerebellum. When the full cerebellar topography was examined
comprehensively, an unexpected observation emerged that included both the somatomotor and association representations.
The cerebellum possesses three distinct maps of the cerebral
cortex. The primary map begins with an inverted somatomotor
representation in the anterior lobe and then progresses posteriorly with sequential representations of distinct premotor and
association networks. The topography inverts near Crus I/II,
forming a mirror-image secondary map of the full cerebrum in
the posterior lobe. A final inversion occurs, yielding a tentative
tertiary map in the most posterior zone near lobule IX. We
discuss these findings in relation to prior studies of cerebellar
organization, as well as caveats and ambiguities associated
with using functional connectivity as a mapping tool.
Somatomotor Representation in the Human Cerebellum
Using functional connectivity, the primary and secondary
somatomotor representations were detected in the anterior and
posterior lobes of the cerebellum (Fig. 5). The locations were
consistent with expectations based on monkey (Adrian 1943)
and cat physiology (Snider and Stowell 1944) and prior taskbased estimates of cerebellar somatomotor topography in the
human (e.g., Grodd et al. 2001; Wiestler et al. 2011). The
J Neurophysiol • VOL

anterior representation was inverted, progressing from foot to
hand to tongue, forming an upside down “’homunculus.” The
posterior representation revealed a mirror-image, upright representation. The symmetry of functional connectivity was not
uniform across the topographic representation. The hand representation was significantly more lateralized than either the
foot or tongue representations (Fig. 6), paralleling the observation of Yeo et al. (2011) that the hand representation shows
the weakest functional coupling with the opposite hemisphere.
One possibility is that intrinsic functional coupling reflects the
functional independence of the right and left hands. Anatomical studies in the monkey have observed variation in the
projection patterns for different topographic zones of M1, with
the hand and foot representations absent interhemispheric projections (Pandya and Vignolo 1971).
Two further observations are notable. First, the primary
somatomotor representation in the anterior lobe extends just
beyond the primary fissure and then stops. The regions of
the cerebellum posterior to the primary somatomotor representation near HVI are associated with a cerebral network
including premotor regions that do not possess a discernable
motor topography by our analyses. Schlerf et al. (2010)
recently hypothesized a somatomotor representation in this
region that supports complex motor movements. Our data
suggest that such a representation, if it exists, is not topographically coupled to the topography of primary motor

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 13. Cerebrocerebellar circuits involved in
somatomotor networks demonstrate topographic specificity. A: left cerebral cortex
connectivity maps are shown for right seed
regions within the estimated foot, hand, and
tongue representations of the anterior lobe of
the cerebellum. The surface maps show the
entirety of the functional connectivity pattern
(threshold r ⫽ 0.1). The dark lines on the
cortical surface represent the boundaries of
the 7 cortical networks, plotted for reference.
The locations of the cerebellar seed regions
are shown below each map. B: left cerebral
regions are displayed that were used for quantitative assessment of specificity. Right cerebral regions obtained from reflecting left cerebral regions across the midline are not
shown. PrCv, ventral precentral cortex; FEF,
frontal eye field. Subscripts H, F, and T indicate hand, foot, and tongue representations in
M1 and S1 cortex. C: quantitative measures
of functional connectivity strength are plotted
in polar form for cerebellar anterior lobe seed
regions linked to the foot (green line), hand
(red line), and tongue (blue line) representations. Functional connectivity strengths were
computed between contralateral cerebral and
cerebellar regions and averaged across the
hemispheres. The polar scale ranges from r ⫽
⫺0.05 (center) to r ⫽ 0.25 (outer boundary)
in 0.1-step increments.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2339

cortex. In our data, the cerebellar region examined by
Schlerf et al. is functionally coupled to cerebral regions that
participate in motor control (premotor regions) as well as
response selection (see Yeo et al. 2011 for discussion). It
will thus be interesting in the future to examine the topography of these premotor structures using complex motor
movements such as sequences of extension and flexion
across digits. Second, the secondary motor representation in
the posterior lobe was located at or near lobule VIII. It did not
continue into the most posterior extent of the cerebellum including
lobule IX. Thus, in addition to needing a functional account of the
organization of the extensive intermediate portion of the cerebellum between the somatomotor representations including Crus I
and II, the somatomotor maps also leave unexplained the most
posterior region near IX.
Representation of Cerebral Association Cortex in the
Human Cerebellum
The majority of the human cerebellum is functionally coupled to cerebral association areas. Of particular interest are
J Neurophysiol • VOL

cerebral networks associated with cognitive control (the orange
network in Fig. 8) and the default network (the red network in
Fig. 8). Almost one-half of the human cerebellum targets these
two cerebral networks, including all of Crus I and II. These
networks have been extensively studied in the human literature
for their potential role in higher level cognition, including
remembering and planning. Prior fcMRI studies have noted
functional coupling of these cerebral networks to the cerebellum (Habas et al. 2009; Krienen and Buckner 2009; O’Reilly et
al. 2010). The present results provide a more complete map.
By comprehensively mapping the cerebral cortex and also
the cerebellum, we were able to quantitatively explore the
relation between the extent of the cerebral representation of
a network and its volume in the cerebellum (Fig. 11). A
roughly linear relation emerged, but exceptions were noted.
In general, the extent of the cerebellum dedicated to a
network was predicted by the size of the network in the
cerebral cortex. If anything, there was an overrepresentation
of association networks in the cerebellum. However, the
exact details of the relation may be biased, because some
regions of the cerebral cortex had poor SNR, including the

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 14. Evidence for specificity of cerebrocerebellar circuits involving association cortex. The strategy for exploring and quantifying the specificity of somatomotor circuits in
Fig. 13 is generalized to distributed regions of
association cortex. A–D each display the
whole brain cerebral surface connectivity pattern for a specific set of bilateral cerebellar
seed regions (shown below each map). Cortical maps are displayed based on functional
connectivity with contralateral cerebellar regions. Note that separate regions of the cerebellum are selectively correlated with distinct
cerebral association networks, including
those linked to higher level cognition.

2340

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

inferior temporal cortex and orbital frontal cortex (see Fig.
3 of Yeo et al. 2011). Cerebellar regions that are functionally correlated to these regions may be underestimated.
One inconsistency with prior findings concerns the characterization of the cerebellar regions that couple to the
default network. Replicating the findings of Krienen and
Buckner (2009) but different from those of Habas et al.
(2009), we observed that the major region of the cerebellum
coupled to the default network is within Crus I/II (the red
network in Fig. 8). This region is surrounded by a representation of the frontoparietal control network (the orange
network in Fig. 8) and is distinct from the region mapped to
IX. Several analyses confirmed this topography. Examining
the cerebral map generated from examining functional connectivity for a small seed region placed within Crus I
revealed a near-complete map of the default network (Fig.
14A). Quantitative analysis demonstrated that coupling to
the default network is selective (Fig. 15B) and distinct from
the frontoparietal control network (Fig. 15C). Thus we are
confident that the large region in Crus I/II is the major
cerebellar region coupled to the default network. The observation that this cerebellar region is surrounded by a
distinct association network on both its anterior and posterior borders may have led to the difficulty in detecting its
presence in some prior analyses. In the next section, a
hypothesis is offered that may account for this peculiar
organizational feature.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

Cerebellar Topography Consists of Multiple, Inverted
Representations of the Cerebrum
The cerebellum, like the cerebral cortex, is a two-dimensional sheet of cortex (Van Essen 2002). Unlike the cerebral
cortex, the cerebellum’s histology is essentially invariant
throughout cortex and has no discernable areal boundaries (Ito
1984). The well-established maps of body space in the anterior
and posterior lobes suggest that the cerebellum has multiple,
orderly topographic representations that presumably arise from
anatomical connectivity patterns. The historical puzzle has
been to account for the remaining regions of the cerebellum
between the established somatomotor maps (Manni and
Petrosini 2004). The present results suggest a parsimonious
explanation that links both the known topography of the
somatomotor representations and the newer results that map
the intervening regions to multiple cerebral association networks.
The seemingly complex organization of the cerebellum
can be accounted for by the hypothesis that the cerebellum
possesses a complete map of the cerebral cortex that begins
in the anterior lobe and extends into Crus I/II, and then a
second mirror-image map that begins in Crus I/II and extends through the posterior lobe. Figure 16 presents sagittal
sections from the left cerebellum that best illustrate this
organization. The two cerebellar maps do not represent only
the somatomotor cerebral cortex, but rather map an orderly

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Fig. 15. Quantitative evaluation of the specificity of cerebrocerebellar circuits involving association cortex. A: reference regions used for quantitative analysis
of association cortex. PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; PFC, prefrontal cortex; STS, superior temporal sulcus. B–D: polar plots of functional connectivity strength
for each of the seed regions from Fig. 14. Note that each polar plot has a distinct connectivity profile. The red lines display functional connectivity strength
between the left cerebellar seed regions and right cerebral cortex seed regions, and the blue lines display the contralateral pairings. The similarity between the
red and blue lines shows that the coupling profiles are reliable between the hemispheres. For B and C, the polar scale ranges from r ⫽ ⫺0.2 (center) to r ⫽ 0.3
(outer boundary) in 0.1-step increments. For D and E, the polar scale ranges from r ⫽ ⫺0.15 (center) to r ⫽ 0.2 (outer boundary) in 0.05-step increments.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

2341

Caveats and Limitations
Fig. 16. The cerebellum possesses multiple representations of the cerebral
cortex. The topographic orderings of the cerebral networks are illustrated for
2 sagittal sections of the left cerebellum (x ⫽ ⫺24 and x ⫽ ⫺12). The
parcellation is derived from the full data sample (n ⫽ 1,000). Letters are
displayed to aid visualization of the representation ordering. F, foot; H, hand;
T, tongue; P, purple network; G, green network; O, orange network; R, red
network. The colored networks refer to the 7-network parcellation (Fig. 8), and
the somatomotor topography refers to the ordering as estimated in Fig. 5. G*
refers to the minimal green network in the x ⫽ ⫺24 section, which is better
illustrated in Fig. 8 (x ⫽⫺8). G⫺ is highlighted because it does not follow the
expected topographic pattern but rather may be an erroneous mapping, because
it is located on the border between the cerebellum and cerebral cortex within
a region of uncertain mapping (see Fig. 10). The white lines demarcate
estimated boundaries between the maps and do not have significance in
relation to sulcal boundaries. Three distinct representations are observed,
labeled the primary, secondary, and tertiary representations. Each is a mirrorimage ordering of the adjacent map. The question mark in the tertiary
representation indicates the uncertain beginning point, if it does exist, of a third
somatomotor representation. R* refers to the red network, which can be seen
in the x ⫽ ⫺12 section but not the x ⫽ ⫺24 section. What appears initially as
a complex pattern may be parsimoniously explained by the hypothesis that the
major portion of the cerebellum contains a double, inverted representation of
the entire cerebral cortex and then a potential tertiary representation in its most
posterior extent. The classic observation of primary and secondary somatomotor representation in the anterior and posterior lobes may be the beginning and
end points of much larger maps.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

In considering the possibility that the cerebellum has
multiple, complete maps of the cerebral cortex, we must
discuss several caveats and limitations. In particular, functional connectivity measures do not only reflect direct anatomy (Fox and Raichle 2007; Moeller et al. 2009; Buckner et
al. 2010; Cole et al. 2010). Functional connectivity is based
on correlated functional signals and thus cannot disambiguate whether a correlation reflects a direct coupling or an
indirect effect of coupling among polysynaptically connected regions. This creates a specific ambiguity when proposing that the cerebellum has multiple maps of the cerebral
cortex. A plausible alternative explanation is that one of the
cerebellar maps represents coupling with frontal cortex and
the other with parietal cortex, or some other combination of
distributed cerebral areas. This ambiguity arises because
each cerebral network has strongly coupled regions in both
frontal and parietal cortices, including the somatomotor
networks that span precentral (motor) and postcentral (somatosensory) gyrus. The functional connectivity data thus
do not disambiguate whether the separate cerebellar maps
arise from distinct cerebral areas or whether each map is
interconnected with a distributed cerebral network. Further
adding to this uncertainty, functional connectivity measures

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

progression from somatomotor cortex to premotor cortex to
association cortex. On the basis of quantitative analysis
presented in Fig. 11, we can further hypothesize that the
topographic mapping between the cerebrum and cerebellum
is roughly homotopic, with the few exceptions discussed
earlier and also the meager representation of the green
network in the anterior lobe. Within this hypothesis, the
established somatomotor maps are the end points of a much
larger representation of the entire cerebral cortex.
There is also tentative evidence for a third map, as illustrated
in Fig. 16. The tertiary map is mirrored relative to the adjacent
secondary map, meaning its topography is inverted like that of
the primary map beginning in the anterior lobe. We are not as
confident about this tertiary map, because clear evidence for a
tertiary somatomotor representation could not be detected
(noted by the question mark in Fig. 16). However, the possibility of a tertiary representation may help to explain the robust
representation of association cortex near lobule IX (e.g., Fig. 8,
x ⫽ ⫺8), in particular, association cortex coupled to the default
network (Habas et al. 2009; Krienen and Buckner 2009). The
large association region of the cerebellum near Crus I and II
may represent the intersection of the primary and secondary
maps; the cerebellar region near lobule IX may represent the
association portion of the tertiary map. The hypothesized
tertiary map may also explain a critical detail of prior anatomical work. In addition to extensive labeling of Crus II, Kelly
and Strick (2003) also noted a small group of labeled neurons
in IX/X in the monkey following anterograde transneuronal
tracing of efferents from prefrontal area 46. This distinct region
of labeled neurons is predicted by the hypothesis that the
cerebellum possesses three topographic maps of the cerebral
cortex. The neurons labeled in IX/X fall within the tertiary
map.

2342

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

lum, as might be expected given the extensive evidence for
longitudinal zones (see Ito 1984 for review). In this regard, it
is important to note that the present work is cortical centric.
The cerebellar cortex, particularly the intermediate zone, is the
target of substantial ascending pathways that originate in the
spinal cord. Our analyses did not explore these pathways, and
important features of cerebellar organization may have been
missed. The topographic maps estimated at present may also be
of low resolution relative to other features of cerebellar organization such as those suggested by the observation of fractured somatotopy (Shambes et al. 1978; Manni and Petrosini
2004) and examination of topography in relation to the deep
cerebellar nuclei. Similarly, assuming that some level of interdigitation of cerebral projection regions exists in the cerebellum, as in the striatum (Eblen and Graybiel 1995; Selemon and
Goldman-Rakic 1985), our methods will obscure these details
of the topography and assign the cerebellar regions to their
most dominant principal cerebral targets. The specificity of the
results in Figs. 13 and 15 suggests that the topography is
unlikely to contain large amounts of overlap between distinct
principal target regions. However, the low resolution of the
technique may miss important features of cerebellar topography and the results should be interpreted accordingly.

2
As far as we have been able to surmise to date, the intrinsic functional
correlations between the cerebellum and cerebral cortex are symmetrical. We
have been unable to distinguish the cortico-pontocerebellar pathway from the
cerebello-thalamocortical pathway. Focal pontine lesions disrupt fcMRI coupling between the cerebrum and cerebellum (Lu et al. in press). However,
preliminary evidence also suggests that thalamic lesions do, as well (Lu J, Liu
H, Buckner RL, and Li K, unpublished observations). Intrinsic fluctuations in
the cerebellum may be coupled to intrinsic fluctuations in the cerebral cortex
via an emergent property of the closed-loop circuit that involves both excitatory and inhibitory influences between the structures. Within this possibility,
the correlated activity fluctuations between the structures should not be
interpreted to differentially reflect the efferent or afferent projections, but
rather the fluctuating activity of the full circuit.

GRANTS

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Conclusions
Our results reveal that regions of the cerebellum are functionally coupled to specific cerebral networks. The results
further suggest that a relatively simple principle might explain
the global topographic organization of the cerebellum. The
complete cerebral cortex (including somatomotor, premotor,
and association cortices) may project to a homotopic map in
the cerebellum that begins in the anterior lobe somatomotor
representation and ends near Crus I/II. A mirror-image secondary map may then begin in Crus I/II and end with the second
somatomotor representation near HVIII. Provisional evidence
is also provided for a tertiary map at the farthest extent of the
posterior lobe.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jeremy Schmahmann for discussion, the Harvard Center for
Brain Science Neuroimaging Core and the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
imaging support, the Harvard FAS Research Computing Group (in particular
James Cuff, Jerry Lotto, and Jeff Chang), and the Neuroinformatics Research
Group (Gabriele Fariello, Timothy O’Keefe, and Victor Petrov). We thank
Haderer & Müller Biomedical Art for assistance with Fig. 5. F. M. Krienen
was supported by fellowships from the Department of Defense, an Ashford
Graduate Fellowship in the Sciences, and the Sackler Scholars Program in
Psychobiology. A. Castellanos and J. C. Diaz were supported by the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute Exceptional Research Opportunities Program.

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants
AG021910, P41 RR14074, and K08 MH067966, the Massachusetts General
Hospital-University of California, Los Angeles Human Connectome Project
(U54MH091665), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and the Simons
Foundation.
DISCLAIMER
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH).

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

also presently cannot disambiguate efferents from afferents.2
The transneuronal tracing data provide some insight. Injections of anterograde viral tracers in monkey M1 label distinct
regions in the anterior and posterior lobes, suggesting that the
individual frontal areas possess efferents to both the primary
and secondary somatomotor representations within the cerebellum (see Fig. 8 of Kelly and Strick 2003). Similarly, area 46
efferents demonstrate dense labeling in Crus II and also a
distinct second region in lobule IX/X. The presence of multiple
cerebellar targets for each cerebral area is consistent with the
possibility that multiple cerebellar maps form circuits with the
same cerebral areas.
It will be important to assess in the future whether distributed cerebral areas converge on the same cerebellar regions.
For example, parietal association cortex near 7a/opt is expected
to project to the same cerebellar region as the prefrontal areas
linked to the default network. Convergence of this form is seen
for the thalamus. Double-labeling techniques reveal that multiple distributed cortical association areas—that are interconnected with each other—also receive convergent projections
from the medial pulvinar (Goldman-Rakic 1988). We suspect
that the cerebellum will possess a similar form of orderly
topography.
The question of whether distributed cerebral areas within the
same network converge on the same cerebellar regions is
particularly critical, because the functional connectivity results
do not directly tell us that prefrontal areas project to the
cerebellum. The present results demonstrate that correlated
networks of prefrontal and parietal association regions are
coupled to the cerebellum. It seems unlikely, but remains a
possibility, that the coupling is entirely driven by the parietal or
other nonfrontal association areas. That is, the strong prefrontal
coupling may be fully mediated through indirect correlations
with posterior cerebral areas. The transneuronal tracing findings of Strick and colleagues (Middleton and Strick 1994,
2001; Kelly and Strick 2003) and the anterograde tracing
studies of Schmahmann and Pandya (1997b), discussed earlier,
suggest the presence of anatomical connections with prefrontal
cortex. Nonetheless, anatomical studies of the distributed cerebral networks are required to determine which association
areas directly form circuits with the cerebellum and which
components of cerebral networks only interact indirectly with
the cerebellum. Certain prefrontal regions that have shown
lower densities of cerebellar projections (e.g., ventral area 46;
Glickstein et al. 1985) may show functional coupling in our
analyses via polysynaptic corticocortical connections.
A further open issue arises because we detected minimal
evidence for medial to lateral organization within the cerebel-

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM
DISCLOSURES
No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the author(s).

REFERENCES

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Evans AC, Collins DL, Mills SR, Brown ED, Kelly RL, Peters TM. 3D
statistical neuroanatomical models from 305 MRI volumes. Proceedings
IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference. London: MTP, 1993, vol. 95, p. 1813–1817.
Evarts EV, Thach WT. Motor mechanisms of the CNS: cerebrocerebellar
interrelations. Annu Rev Physiol 31: 451– 498, 1969.
Fischl B, Liu A, Dale AM. Automated manifold surgery: constructing geometrically accurate and topologically correct models of the human cerebral
cortex. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 20: 70 – 80, 2001.
Fischl B, Rajendran N, Busa E, Augustinack J, Hinds O, Yeo BTT,
Mohlberg H, Amunts K, Zilles K. Cortical folding patterns and predicting
cytoarchitecture. Cereb Cortex 18: 1973–1980, 2008.
Fischl B, Salat DH, Busa E, Albert M, Dieterich M, Haselgrove C, van der
Kouwe A, Killiany R, Kennedy D, Klaveness S, Montillo A, Makris N,
Rosen B, Dale AM. Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of
neuroanatomical structures in the human brain. Neuron 33: 341–355, 2002.
Fischl B, Salat DH, van der Kouwe AJW, Makris N, Ségonne F, Quinn
BT, Dale AM. Sequence-independent segmentation of magnetic resonance
images. Neuroimage 23: S69 –S84, 2004.
Fischl B, Sereno MI, Dale AM. Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation,
flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage 9: 195–207,
1999a.
Fischl B, Sereno MI, Tootell RBH, Dale AM. High-resolution intersubject
averaging and a coordinate system for the cortical surface. Hum Brain Mapp
8: 272–284, 1999b.
Fonov V, Evans AC, Botteron K, Almli CR, McKinstry RC, Collins DL,
Brain Development Cooperative Group. Unbiased average age-appropriate atlases for pediatric studies. Neuroimage 54: 313–327, 2011.
Fox MD, Raichle ME. Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed
with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 8: 700 –711,
2007.
Fox MD, Zhang DY, Snyder AZ, Raichle ME. The global signal and
observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks. J Neurophysiol 101:
3270 –3283, 2009.
Friston KJ, Ashburner J, Frith CD, Poline JB, Heather JD, Frackowiak
RSJ. Spatial registration and normalization of images. Hum Brain Mapp 3:
165–189, 1995.
Geyer S, Ledberg A, Schleicher A, Kinomura S, Schormann T, Bürgel U,
Klingberg T, Larsson J, Zilles K, Roland PE. Two different areas within
the primary motor cortex of man. Nature 382: 805– 807, 1996.
Glickstein M, May JG, Mercier BE. Corticopontine projection in the macaque: the distribution of labeled cortical cells after large injections of
horseradish-peroxidase in the pontine nuclei. J Comp Neurol 235: 343–359,
1985.
Glickstein M. What does the cerebellum really do? Curr Biol 17: R824 –R827,
2007.
Goldman-Rakic PS. Topography of cognition: parallel distributed networks
in primate association cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 11: 137–156, 1988.
Grefkes C, Geyer S, Schormann T, Roland P, Zilles K. Human somatosensory area 2: observer-independent cytoarchitectonic mapping, interindividual variability and population map. Neuroimage 14: 617– 631, 2001.
Greve DN, Fischl B. Accurate and robust brain image alignment using
boundary-based registration. Neuroimage 48: 63–72, 2009.
Grodd W, Hulsmann E, Lotze M, Wildgruber D, Erb M. Sensorimotor
mapping of the human cerebellum: fMRI evidence of somatotopic organization. Hum Brain Mapp 13: 55–73, 2001.
Habas C, Kamdar N, Nguyen D, Prater K, Beckmann CF, Menon V,
Greicius MD. Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity
networks. J Neurosci 29: 8586 – 8594, 2009.
Hill J, Inder T, Neil J, Dierker D, Harwell J, Van Essen D. Similar patterns
of cortical expansion during human development and evolution. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 107: 13135–13140, 2010.
Holmes G. The cerebellum of man. Brain 62: 1–30, 1939.
Ito M. The Cerebellum and Neural Control. New York: Raven, 1984.
Jenkinson M, Bannister P, Brady M, Smith S. Improved optimization for
the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain
images. Neuroimage 17: 825– 841, 2002.
Kahn I, Andrews-Hanna JR, Vincent JL, Snyder AZ, Buckner RL.
Distinct cortical anatomy linked to subregions of the medial temporal lobe
revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 100: 129 –139,
2008.
Kelly RM, Strick PL. Cerebellar loops with motor cortex and prefrontal
cortex of a nonhuman primate. J Neurosci 23: 8432– 8444, 2003.

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Adrian ED. Afferent areas in the cerebellum connected with the limbs. Brain
66: 289 –315, 1943.
Allen G, McColl R, Barnard H, Ringe WK, Fleckenstein J, Cullum CM.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the cerebellar-prefrontal and cerebellarparietal functional connectivity. Neuroimage 28: 39 – 48, 2005.
Amunts K, Malikovic A, Mohlberg H, Schormann T, Zilles K. Brodmann’s
areas 17 and 18 brought into stereotaxic space—where and how variable?
Neuroimage 11: 66 – 84, 2000.
Andrews-Hanna JR, Reidler JS, Sepulcre J, Poulin R, Buckner RL.
Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain’s default network. Neuron
65: 550 –562, 2010.
Balsters JH, Cussans E, Diedrichsen J, Phillips KA, Preuss TM, Rilling
JK, Ramnani N. Evolution of the cerebellar cortex: the selective expansion
of prefrontal-projecting cerebellar lobules. Neuroimage 49: 2045–2052,
2010.
Ben-Yehudah G, Guediche S, Fiez JA. Cerebellar contributions to verbal
working memory: beyond cognitive theory. Cerebellum 6: 193–201, 2007.
Birn RM, Diamond JB, Smith MA, Bandettini PA. Separating respiratoryvariation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in
fMRI. Neuroimage 31: 1536 –1548, 2006.
Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS. Functional connectivity in
the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn
Reson Med 34: 537–541, 1995.
Biswal BB, Mennes M, Zuo XN, Gohel S, Kelly C, Smith SM, Beckmann
CF, Adelstein JS, Buckner RL, Colcombe S, Dogonowski AM, Ernst M,
Fair D, Hampson M, Hoptman MJ, Hyde JS, Kiviniemi VJ, Kotter R,
Li SJ, Lin CP, Lowe MJ, Mackay C, Madden DJ, Madsen KH,
Margulies DS, Mayberg HS, McMahon K, Monk CS, Mostofsky
SH, Nagel BJ, Pekar JJ, Peltier SJ, Petersen SE, Riedl V, Rombouts
SARB, Rypma B, Schlaggar BL, Schmidt S, Seidler RD, Siegle GJ, Sorg
C, Teng GJ, Veijola J, Villringer A, Walter M, Wang L, Weng XC,
Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Williamson P, Windischberger C, Zang YF,
Zhang HY, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. Toward discovery science of
human brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107: 4734 – 4739, 2010.
Brodal P. The corticopontine projection in rhesus-monkey: origin and principles of organization. Brain 101: 251–283, 1978.
Buckner RL. Human functional connectivity: new tools, unresolved questions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107: 10769 –10770, 2010.
Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL. The brain’s default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann NY Acad Sci 1124:
1–38, 2008.
Cole DM, Smith SM, Beckmann CF. Advances and pitfalls in the analysis
and interpretation of resting-state FMRI data. Front Syst Neurosci 4: 8,
2010.
Cowey A. Projection of retina on to striate and prestriate cortex in squirrel
monkey, Saimiri sciureus. J Neurophysiol 27: 366 –393, 1964.
Dale AM, Fischl B, Sereno MI. Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction. Neuroimage 9: 179 –194, 1999.
Desmond JE, Fiez JA. Neuroimaging studies of the cerebellum: language,
learning and memory. Trends Cogn Sci 2: 355–362, 1998.
Di Martino A, Scheres A, Margulies DS, Kelly AMC, Uddin LQ, Shehzad
Z, Biswal B, Walters JR, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. Functional
connectivity of human striatum: a resting state fMRI study. Cereb Cortex
18: 2735–2747, 2008.
Dickson J, Drury H, Van Essen DC. ‘The surface management system’
(SuMS) database: a surface-based database to aid cortical surface reconstruction, visualization and analysis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
356: 1277–1292, 2001.
Diedrichsen J, Balsters JH, Flavell J, Cussans E, Ramnani N. A probabilistic MR atlas of the human cerebellum. Neuroimage 46: 39 – 46, 2009.
Dosenbach NUF, Fair DA, Miezin FM, Cohen AL, Wenger KK, Dosenbach RAT, Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Raichle ME, Schlaggar
BL, Petersen SE. Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task
control in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 11073–11078, 2007.
Durisko C, Fiez JA. Functional activation in the cerebellum during working
memory and simple speech tasks. Cortex 46: 896 –906, 2010.
Eblen F, Graybiel AM. Highly restricted origin of prefrontal cortical inputs to
striosomes in the macaque monkey. J Neurosci 15: 5999 – 6013, 1995.

2343

2344

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman GL. A default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:
676 – 682, 2001.
Raichle ME. The restless brain. Brain Connect 1: 3–12, 2011.
Roy AK, Shehzad Z, Margulies DS, Kelly AMC, Uddin LQ, Gotimer K,
Biswal BB, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. Functional connectivity of the
human amygdala using resting state fMRI. Neuroimage 45: 614 – 626, 2009.
Schlerf JE, Verstynen TD, Ivry RB, Spencer RMS. Evidence of a novel
somatotopic map in the human neocerebellum during complex actions. J
Neurophysiol 103: 3330 –3336, 2010.
Schmahmann JD, Doyon J, McDonald D, Holmes C, Lavoie K, Hurwitz
AS, Kabani N, Toga A, Evans AC, Petrides M. Three-dimensional MRI
atlas of the human cerebellum in proportional stereotaxic space. Neuroimage
10: 233–260. 1999.
Schmahmann JD, Doyon J, Toga AW, Petrides M, Evans AC. MRI Atlas
of the Human Cerebellum. San Diego, CA: Academic, 2000.
Schmahmann JD, Pandya DN. The cerebrocerebellar system. Int Rev Neurobiol 41: 31– 60, 1997a.
Schmahmann JD, Pandya DN. Anatomic organization of the basilar pontine
projections from prefrontal cortices in rhesus monkey. J Neurosci 17:
438 – 458, 1997b.
Schmahmann JD, Rosene DL, Pandya DN. Motor projections to the basis
pontis in the rhesus monkey. J Comp Neurol 478: 248 –268, 2004a.
Schmahmann JD, Rosene DL, Pandya DN. Ataxia after pontine stroke:
insights from pontocerebellar fibers in monkey. Ann Neurol 55: 585–589,
2004b.
Schmahmann JD, Weilburg JB, Sherman JC. The neuropsychiatry of the
cerebellum—insights from the clinic. Cerebellum 6: 254 –267, 2007.
Seeley WW, Menon V, Schatzberg AF, Keller J, Glover GH, Kenna H,
Reiss AL, Greicius MD. Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for
salience processing and executive control. J Neurosci 27: 2349 –2356, 2007.
Ségonne F, Dale AM, Busa E, Glessner M, Salat D, Hahn HK, Fischl B. A
hybrid approach to the skull stripping problem in MRI. Neuroimage 22:
1060 –1075, 2004.
Ségonne F, Pacheco J, Fischl B. Geometrically accurate topology-correction
of cortical surfaces using nonseparating loops. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 26:
518 –529, 2007.
Selemon LD, Goldman-Rakic PS. Longitudinal topography and interdigitation of corticostriatal projections in the rhesus monkey. J Neurosci 5:
776 –794, 1985.
Shambes GM, Gibson JM, Welker W. Fractured somatotopy in granule cell
tactile areas of rat cerebellar hemispheres revealed by micromapping. Brain
Behav Evol 15: 94 –140, 1978.
Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Woolrich MW, Beckmann CF, Behrens TEJ,
Johansen-Berg H, Bannister PR, De Luca M, Drobnjak I, Flitney DE,
Niazy RK, Saunders J, Vickers J, Zhang Y, De Stefano N, Brady JM,
Matthews PM. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis
and implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23: S208 –S219, 2004.
Snider RS, Eldred E. Cerebro-cerebellar relationships in the monkey. J
Neurophysiol 15: 27– 40, 1952.
Snider RS, Stowell A. Receiving areas of the tactile, auditory and visual
systems in the cerebellum. J Neurophysiol 7: 331–357, 1944.
Spencer RMC, Verstynen T, Brett M, Ivry R. Cerebellar activation during
discrete and not continuous timed movements: an fMRI study. Neuroimage
36: 378 –387, 2007.
Stoodley CJ, Schmahmann JD. Functional topography in the human cerebellum: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Neuroimage 44: 489 –501,
2009.
Strick PL, Dum RP, Fiez JA. Cerebellum and nonmotor function. Annu Rev
Neurosci 32: 413– 434, 2009.
Strick PL. How do the basal ganglia and cerebellum gain access to the cortical
motor areas? Behav Brain Res 18: 107–123, 1985.
Timmann D, Daum I. Cerebellar contributions to cognitive functions: a
progress report after two decades of research. Cerebellum 6: 159 –162,
2007.
van der Kouwe AJW, Benner T, Fischl B, Schmitt F, Salat DH, Harder M,
Sorensen AG, Dale AM. On-line automatic slice positioning for brain MR
imaging. Neuroimage 27: 222–230, 2005.
van der Kouwe AJW, Benner T, Salat DH, Fischl B. Brain morphometry
with multiecho MPRAGE. Neuroimage 40: 559 –569, 2008.
Van Dijk KRA, Hedden T, Venkataraman A, Evans KC, Lazar SW,
Buckner RL. Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization. J Neurophysiol 103: 297–321,
2010.

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

Kemp JM, Powell TPS. The connexions of the striatum and globus pallidus:
synthesis and speculation. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 262:
441– 457, 1971.
Krienen FM, Buckner RL. Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by
intrinsic functional connectivity. Cereb Cortex 19: 2485–2497, 2009.
Kwong KK, Belliveau JW, Chesler DA, Goldberg IE, Weisskoff RM,
Poncelet BP, Kennedy DN, Hoppel BE, Cohen MS, Turner R, Cheng
HM, Brady TJ, Rosen BR. Dynamic magnetic resonance imaging of
human brain activity during primary sensory stimulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 89: 5675–5679, 1992.
Laird AR, Fox PM, Price CJ, Glahn DC, Uecker AM, Lancaster JL,
Turkeltaub PE, Kochunov P, Fox PT. ALE meta-analysis: controlling the
false discovery rate and performing statistical contrasts. Hum Brain Mapp
25: 155– 64, 2005.
Larsell O. The Comparative Anatomy and Histology of the Cerebellum From
Monotremes Through Apes. Minneapolis, MN: The University of Minnesota
Press, 1970.
Leiner HC, Leiner AL, Dow RS. Does the cerebellum contribute to mental
skills? Behav Neurosci 100: 443– 454, 1986.
Leiner HC. Solving the mystery of the human cerebellum. Neuropsychol Rev
20: 229 –235, 2010.
Lu J, Liu H, Zhang M, Wang D, Cao Y, Ma Q, Rong D, Wang X, Buckner
RL, Li K. Focal pontine lesions provide evidence that resting-state functional connectivity reflects polysynaptic anatomical pathways. J Neurosci.
In press.
Malikovic A, Amunts K, Schleicher A, Mohlberg H, Eickhoff SB, Wilms
M, Palomero-Gallagher N, Armstrong E, Zilles K. Cytoarchitectonic
analysis of the human extrastriate cortex in the region of V5/MT⫹: a
probabilistic, stereotaxic map of area hOc5. Cereb Cortex 17: 562–574,
2007.
Manni E, Petrosini L. A century of cerebellar somatotopy: a debated representation. Nat Rev Neurosci 5: 241–249, 2004.
Marcus DS, Fotenos AF, Csernansky JG, Morris JC, Buckner RL. Open
access series of imaging studies: longitudinal MRI data in nondemented and
demented older adults. J Cogn Neurosci 22: 2677–2684, 2010.
Marcus DS, Wang TH, Parker J, Csernansky JG, Morris JC, Buckner
RL. Open access series of imaging studies (OASIS): cross-sectional MRI
data in young, middle aged, nondemented, and demented older adults. J
Cogn Neurosci 19: 1498 –1507, 2007.
Margulies DS, Kelly AMC, Uddin LQ, Biswal BB, Castellanos FX, Milham MP. Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex.
Neuroimage 37: 579 –588, 2007.
Marvel CL, Desmond JE. The contributions of cerebro-cerebellar circuitry to
executive verbal working memory. Cortex 46: 880 – 895, 2010.
Middleton FA, Strick PL. Anatomical evidence for cerebellar and basal
ganglia involvement in higher cognitive function. Science 266: 458 – 461,
1994.
Middleton FA, Strick PL. Cerebellar projections to the prefrontal cortex of
the primate. J Neurosci 21: 700 –712, 2001.
Moeller S, Nallasamy N, Tsao DY, Freiwald WA. Functional connectivity of
the macaque brain across stimulus and arousal states. J Neurosci 29:
5897–5909, 2009.
Murphy K, Birn RM, Handwerker DA, Jones TB, Bandettini PA. The
impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: are anticorrelated networks introduced? Neuroimage 44: 893–905, 2009.
Ogawa S, Tank DW, Menon R, Ellermann JM, Kim SG, Merkle H,
Ugurbil K. Instrinsic signal changes accompanying sensory stimulation:
functional brain mapping with magnetic resonance imaging. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 89: 5951–5955, 1992.
O’Reilly JX, Beckmann CF, Tomassini V, Ramnani N, Johansen-Berg H.
Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by
resting state functional connectivity. Cereb Cortex 20: 953–965, 2010.
O’Reilly JX, Mesulam MM, Nobre AC. The cerebellum predicts the timing
of perceptual events. J Neurosci 28: 2252–2260, 2008.
Pandya DN, Vignolo LA. Intra- and interhemispheric projections of the
precentral, premotor and arcuate areas in the rhesus monkey. Brain Res 26:
217–233, 1971.
Petersen SE, Fox PT, Posner MI, Mintun M, Raichle ME. Positron
emission tomographic studies of the processing of single words. J Cogn
Neurosci 1: 153–170, 1989.
Preuss TM. What is it like to be human? In: The Cognitive Neurosciences III,
edited by Gazzaniga M. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004, p. 5–22.

THE HUMAN CEREBELLUM
Van Essen DC. A population-average, landmark-and surface-based (PALS)
atlas of human cerebral cortex. Neuroimage 28: 635– 662, 2005.
Van Essen DC. Surface-based atlases of cerebellar cortex in the human,
macaque and mouse. Ann NY Acad Sci 978: 468 – 479, 2002.
Van Essen DC, Dierker DL. Surface-based and probabilistic atlases of
primate cerebral cortex. Neuron 56: 209 –225, 2007.
Van Essen DC, Newsome WT, Bixby JL. The pattern of interhemispheric
connections and its relationship to extrastriate visual areas in the macaque
monkey. J Neurosci 2: 265–283, 1982.
Vincent JL, Snyder AZ, Fox MD, Shannon BJ, Andrews JR, Raichle ME,
Buckner RL. Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampalparietal memory network. J Neurophysiol 96: 3517–3531, 2006.
Wandell BA, Dumoulin SO, Brewer AA. Visual field maps in human cortex.
Neuron 56: 366 –383, 2007.
Wiestler T, McGonigle DJ, Diedrichsen J. Integration of sensory and motor
representations of single fingers in the human cerebellum. J Neurophysiol
105: 3042–3053, 2011.

2345

Wilms M, Eickhoff SB, Specht K, Amunts K, Shah NJ, Malikovic A, Fink
GR. Human V5/MT⫹: comparison of functional and cytoarchitectonic data.
Anat Embryol 210: 485– 495, 2005.
Wise RG, Ide K, Poulin MJ, Tracey I. Resting fluctuations in arterial carbon
dioxide induce significant low frequency variations in BOLD signal. Neuroimage 21: 1652–1664, 2004.
Yeo BTT, Krienen FM, Sepulcre J, Sabuncu MR, Lashkari L, Hollinshead
M, Roffman JL, Smoller JW, Zöllei L, Polimeni JR, Fischl B, Liu H,
Buckner RL. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by
intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 106: 1125–1165, 2011.
Yeo BTT, Sabuncu MR, Vercauteren T, Holt DJ, Amunts K, Zilles K,
Golland P, Fischl B. Learning task-optimal registration cost functions for
localizing cytoarchitecture and function in the cerebral cortex. IEEE Trans
Med Imaging 29: 1424 –1441, 2010.
Zhang D, Snyder AZ, Fox MD, Sansbury MW, Shimony JS, Raichle ME.
Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus.
J Neurophysiol 100: 1740 –1748, 2008.

Downloaded from jn.physiology.org on November 20, 2011

J Neurophysiol • VOL

106 • NOVEMBER 2011 •

www.jn.org

