26

Abstracts / Int. J. Devl Neuroscience 47 (2015) 1–131

cus, correlate with a higher risk of developing cognitive deﬁcits and
temporal lobe epilepsy as adults, suggesting that they may permanently change the developmental trajectory of neuronal circuits.
The mechanisms underlying these effects are not clear. Cationchloride cotransporter KCC2 decreases intracellular Cl− levels and
renders GABA responses hyperpolarizing. Recent data suggest that
KCC2 also modulates excitatory synapse development. Here, we
demonstrated that KCC2 expression is altered by early-life febrile
status epilepticus and investigated the functional impact of this
alteration on subsequent synapse formation.
We analyzed KCC2 expression and spine density in the hippocampus of a well-established rodent model of atypical febrile
seizures, combining a cortical freeze lesion at post-natal day 1 (P1)
and hyperthermia-induced seizure at P10 (LHS rats). At P20, we
found a precocious increase in KCC2 protein levels, accompanied
by a negative shift of Egaba following high-frequency stimulation.
In parallel, we observed a striking reduction in dendritic spine
density and of mEPSC amplitude and frequency in CA1 pyramidal
neurons. To investigate whether KCC2 precocious overexpression
plays a role in spine alterations, we mimicked it in hippocampal
organotypic cultures by biolistic transfection and in-vivo by inutero electroporation. We found that both manipulations decreased
spine density. Finally, to causally link KCC2 increased expression
to spine loss in the LHS model, we blocked KCC2 in vivo by in
utero electroporation of shRNA, and induced the dual pathologies
as explained above. Our preliminary results suggest that reducing KCC2 expression levels in LHS rats rescued spine density loss.
Therefore, increased KCC2 levels induced by early-life seizure affect
spine formation and may be a contributing factor to the occurrence
of hippocampal atrophy and associated cognitive deﬁcits.

injected. 18 F-FDG was injected (6 MBq, 0.2 mL). Mice were scanned
by microPET and cortex/cerebellum was quantitative analysis.
Results:
Dose (mg/kg)
Control group
Model group
Risperidone group
PQQ group

0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
20
50

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2015.04.078
ISDN2014 0097
Age-related changes in the topological
organization of white matter structural
networks across the human lifespan
Tengda Zhao 1,2,∗ , Miao Cao 1,2 , Xi-Nian Zuo 2,3,4,5 ,
Qi Dong 1,2 , Yong He 1,2 , Ni Shu 1,2

ISDN2014 0096

1

X.Q. Zhou ∗ , Q.C. Chen, S.S. Mao, X.F. Qin, X.J. Xu,
Y.Y. Kong
Key Laboratory of Nuclear Medicine, Ministry of
Health, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Nuclear
Medicine, Jiangsu Institute of Nuclear Medicine,
China
E-mail address: zhouxingqin@jsinm.org (X.Q.
Zhou).
Introduction: Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ), an essential
nutrient, antioxidant and nerve growth factor has received attention for its ability to protect the brain against oxidative damage.
An accumulating evidence has indicated that the neuroprotective function of PQQ is extraordinary and worthy of further
exploration. PQQ administration signiﬁcantly attenuated MK-801induced increases in stereotypical behavior and ataxia were found
in our previously study. To elucidate the underlying mechanisms
of PQQ, future studies are necessary. In this study, we evaluated
the effects of different doses of PQQ on uptake value of cortex/cerebellar in MK-801-induced mice using 18 F-FDG imaging.
Methods: Mice were divided into four groups: (1) control group:
saline was injected after injection saline 30 min; (2) model group:
MK-801 (0.6 mg/kg) was injected after injection saline 30 min; (3)
risperidone group: MK-801 (0.6 mg/kg) was injected after injection
risperidone (0.5 mg/kg) 30 min; (4) PQQ group: Twenty minutes
after the ﬁrst injection of 20% mannitol, PQQ was injected (0.001,
0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 20, 50 mg/kg), 30 min after, MK-801 (0.6 mg/kg) was

1.013
1.031
1.052
1.064
1.107
1.161
1.003

Discussion: PET imaging showed that the radioactivity uptake
of the cortex/cerebellar decreased in the MK-801-induced mice
than in normal. After intervention by risperidone, the cortex/cerebellar radioactivity uptake was increased. The value was
also increased with increase of PQQ dose. The results indicate that
PQQ may prevent the development of MK-801-induced cognitive
deﬁcits if used in appropriate doses, which suggests new treatment
approaches for schizophrenia in humans.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2015.04.077

Effects of PQQ on cognitive function induced by
MK801 and its molecular imaging evaluation

Cortex/cerebellar
1.395
0.979
1.092

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and
Learning & IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875,
China
2 Center for Collaboration and Innovation in Brain
and Learning Sciences, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing 100875, China
3 Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of
Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100101, China
4 Laboratory for Functional Connectome and
Development, Institute of Psychology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
5 Magnetic Resonance Imaging Research Center,
Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100101, China

Introduction: Lifespan is a dynamic process with remarkable
changes in brain structure and function. Previous neuroimaging
studies have indicated age-related changes in regional gray matter
morphology and speciﬁc white matter (WM) tracts across lifespan.
Recently, researchers have suggested the brain can be modeled as a
network by characterizing the interactions between regions. However, the age-related alterations in the topological architecture of
WM structural networks across the human lifespan remain largely
unknown and are crucial to understanding the dynamic functional
changes with age.
Methods: We employed diffusion MRI and deterministic tractography approaches to reconstruct whole-brain WM structural
connectivity networks in a group of 113 healthy individuals
ranging from 9 to 85 years old from a public NKI/Rockland
Sample (http://fcon 1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/pro/nki.html), followed by a graph theoretical analysis.

Abstracts / Int. J. Devl Neuroscience 47 (2015) 1–131

27

Conclusion: These data indicated lifespan changes in the topological organization of human whole-brain WM networks, thus
providing possible structural substrates underlying behavioral and
cognitive changes with age.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2015.04.079
ISDN2014 0099

Fig. 1. The lifespan trajectories of the global network metrics of Wm networks.
(A) Tje lifespan trajectories of global and local efﬁciency. (B) The lifespan trajectories of small-world parameters (Lp, Cp, normalized Lp, normalized Cp and
small-worldness). The blue dots represent the adjusted values of each subject after
controlling for age, gender, and brain size. The curve-ﬁtted lines are shown in red.
Signiﬁcant age-related trajectories were found for all global metrics of the WM
networks.

Results: Most of the global network properties, including network strength, topological efﬁciency, and robustness, followed an
inverted U-shaped trajectory with an age peak at the fourth decade
(Fig. 1). The brain areas with the most prominent quadratic changes
with age were primarily located in the prefrontal and temporal
cortices and exhibited heterogeneous trajectories: several defaultmode regions displayed prolonged maturation and aging compared
to the prefrontal cortex (Fig. 2). Rich-club organization was evident
across lifespan, whereas hub integration decreased linearly with
age, especially accompanied by the loss of frontal hubs and their
connections. Finally, we identiﬁed age-related quadratic changes
in WM connectivity strength predominantly within and between
prefrontal and temporal modules.

Reversal of immobilization stress-induced
anorexia and endogenous leptin levels by
Rauwolﬁa serpentina in rats: Relationship with
adaptation to stress
Erum Shireen 1,2,∗ , Wafa Bint-e-Ali 1,2 , Sania
Shafaq 1,2 , Azka Majeed 1,2 , Rija Fatima 1,2 , Maria
Masroor 1,2 , Darakshan J. Haleem 1,2
1 Department of Biochemistry, Neurochemistry and
Biochemical Neuropharmacology Research
Laboratory, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan
2 Neuroscience Research Laboratory, Dr Panjwani
Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research,
University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan
E-mail addresses: eshireen@uok.edu.pk,
erum shireen@yahoo.com (E. Shireen).

Clinical observations supported the hypothesis that stress is
the major precipitating factor in the onset of depression, anorexia
nervosa, diabetes and obesity. The objective of present work is to
investigate the effects of post stress administration of Rauwolﬁa
serpentina extract on adaptation to immobilization stress in rats.
The plant extract (10 mg/kg) was orally administered after the termination of immobilization stress, daily for 5 days, to monitor
drug-induced behavioral change and tolerance in immobilization
stress-induced anorexia. We also tested effects of R. serpentina
extract on endogenous leptin and glucose level in unstressed and
stressed animals to explore the possible role of HPA axis in the
modulation of stressed induced behavioral deﬁcits and adaptation
to stress. We ﬁnd that that R. serpentina extract can blunt stressinduced anorexigenic as well as anxiogenic-like effects. Moreover,
R. serpentina extract reversed adverse effects of stress and facilitate adaptation to an uncontrollable stressor by reducing stress
perception. The present study shows that immobilization stress
induced decreases in food intake, body weight as well as behavioral
deﬁcits were reversed by R. serpentina extract suggesting anxiolytic like proﬁle of drug. This effect of R. serpentina extract can
be explained in terms of additive effects of stress on serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) neurotransmission particularly via
postsynaptic 5HT2C as well as 5HT1A receptors. It is therefore
suggested that post stress administration of R. serpentina extract
provides an innovative approach for the treatment of stress related
disorders.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2015.04.080

Fig. 2. The distribution of regions with signiﬁcant age related alterations and the
AoPs across regions. (A) A 3D representation of brain regions illustrating age-related
alterations of nodal efﬁciency. Two representative nodes were selected to depict the
age-related trajectory curves of nodal efﬁciency, one is the right MFG (upper right
panel) and the other is the left MTG (lower right panel). (B) 3D representation of
the AoPs across the regions with quadratic trajectories (p < 0.05, uncorrected). To
present the early and the late AoPs, left SFGdor and right PCG were selected to
depict the trajectory curves, and the AoPs were marked with orange lines.

